 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchBalancing Act ReportMore information Balancing Act Home Balancing Act FAQ More Balancing Act Resource Futures Home Balancing Act A TRIPLE BOTTOM LINE ANALYSIS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY Updates, links, more details Media releases for Balancing Act Forestry greenhouse accounts method explained Rice industry water use - correction of error on promotional material Ethical Investor article by co-author Barney Foran commenting on some research outcomes ECOS article on mining sustainability Media releases for 'Balancing Act' report Several CSIRO media releases provide information about the Balancing Act research and report. Bankers could lead the sustainability revolution. CSIRO shines a light on mining's triple bottom line. Drink less rather than shower less to save water. Forestry sector greenhouse accounts method - a clarification in response to enquiries In response to several enquiries, the authors have prepared a document giving clarification of the derivation and meaning of figures relating to greenhouse gas emissions on three forestry sectors (pdf 146 Kb) (University of Sydney Web site). CSIRO Media release: Clarification on green house gas accounting for the forestry sector in the Balancing Act report. Correction of error in promotional material regarding water use in the rice industry An error was made in some reporting of Balancing Act in relation to water use by the rice industry. The error stemmed from an incorrect figure inadvertantly used on some report CD covers. The error has now been corrected and the CD covers re-printed. CSIRO media release: Correction on water usage figures assigned to the rice industry. Article from Ethical Inverstor by Barney Foran - &quot;Service industries must flex TBL muscles&quot; An article by Balancing Act co-author Barney Foran provides some comment on the findings of the research. Read the article (pdf 76 Kb) [Article provided with kind permission from the July 2005 edition of Ethical Investor] Article from ECOS on mining sustainability An article relating to mining sustinability and the Balancing Act research will be published soon in ECOS. Article available soon Balancing Act Home Resource Futures This page last updated 29 July, 2005 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2005 
