 Go backward to A Free Software ProjectGo up to TopGo forward to Acknowledgements
The Future
R It is the present aim of the R project to produce a free
implementation of something "close to" version 3 of the S language
and to provide ongoing support and maintenance for the resulting
software. Some members of the R core have proposed that future
developments in S version 4 should be also tracked. At this point it
is unclear whether this will happen.
One development which would help R a good deal would be the
development of an integrated graphical user interface. Some initial
work has begun on this and I believe that it is something which will
come quite quickly.
My personal future interest in R is mainly as a user. Given the
investment I have made in it, I hope that I will be able to get
substantial use out of R for statistical work and teaching.
Related Work
Working on R has shown me that there a number of interesting questions
related to building statistical software. My own conclusion has been
that it is important to pursue efficiency issues, and in particular,
speed.
As noted in section*, Luke Tierney performed some
experiments with R to see what kind of speed increase could be
obtained using byte-code compilation; the indications were that a
speedup by a factor of 20 might be possible for some computations.
There is other evidence that a factor of 100 (roughly the speed of
unoptimised C) might be possible with compilation to native machine
code. With this level of performance, there would be no need for any
foreign function interface and all computations could take
place in a single language environment.
I am intrigued by what such an environment might offer. An increase in
performance of this magnitude is likely to produce a qualitative change
in the use it gets puts to.
The difficulty is that the creation of such a compiled environment
requires the hand of an expert in compilation. There is a real
problem in finding such an expert who is also aware of the type of
problems which statisticians handle. 
