 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchFarming Systems Research Home Future Cities Healthy Ecosystems Resilient Regions &amp; Communities Sustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Programs Farming Systems Current Research Related Links Browse Research Capabilities: Select Topic Area ... Biodiversity Climate Research Ecosystem Services Farming Systems Futures Modelling Landscape Ecology Natural Resource Management Outback Sustainability Pest Management Rainforests Sustainable Agriculture Tropical Savannas Urban Ecosystems Water Farming systems need to be adaptable to meet the demands of consumers, to adopt advances in technology and to respond to a changing environment. By viewing farming systems as part of the environment CSE aims to find ways to improve farming practices to provide both economic and environmental benefits. Our research into farming systems relies both modern technology, such as compter simulations and computer modelling, as well as more conventional techniques, such as field trials and monitoring environmental health. Working directly with farming communities in Australia, and internationally, enables CSE researchers to gain in-depth knowledge about farming practices and also allows knowledge to be passed directly from the scientist to the farmer. Further information about our research achievements in this are can be found in the following articles: Perennial grain crop for salinity control - current research is looking for native grasses which could be grown as a crop and could also help reduce dryland salinity. Farming Ahead, 145, February 2004 (282 Kb) Agriculture: adapting to climate change - CSE research suggests that there may be ways agriculture can adapt and benefit from climate change. ECOS 115, April-June 2003 (87 Kb) Current Research APSIM - APSIM is an Agricultural Production Systems Simulator. Reliable crop production in farming systems - The development of management options such as choice of crop variety, sowing decisions, fallow management, fertiliser management, sowing configuration, irrigation management and marketing options, all with the aim of improving grower and industry confidence in these crops. We work on a range of projects examining the role of &quot;new&quot; (such as canola) and &quot;established&quot; crops (such as maize, grain, legumes, sugar cane and cotton) in farming systems. Related Links APSRU APSIM Deptartment of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry National Farmers&#146; Federation Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation CSE Research This page last updated 11 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
