 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchOutback Sustainability Research Home Future Cities Healthy Ecosystems Resilient Regions &amp; Communities Sustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Programs Outback Sustainability Current Research Resources Related Links Browse Research Capabilities: Select Topic Area ... Biodiversity Climate Research Ecosystem Services Farming Systems Futures Modelling Landscape Ecology Natural Resource Management Outback Sustainability Pest Management Rainforests Sustainable Agriculture Tropical Savannas Urban Ecosystems Water The Outback consists of the arid and semi-arid rangelands, and the northern tropical savannas, which together occupy a huge area of Australia's interior. These landscapes consist mainly of pastoral areas, Aboriginal lands and conservation reserves although the economic value of the region is strongly supported by mining and toursim. Despite their harsh climate and terrain, the arid and semi-arid rangelands are rich in biodiversity and they support a surprising variety of different ecosystems. Balancing conservation and land use is a key objective of CSE's research in this region. We work with Aboriginal communities, farmers, tourist operators and government agencies to develop ways to better manage the land and to plan for the future. CSE's research activities focus on several environments in the outback. The CSIRO Arid Zone Research Centre in Alice Springs and the Davies Lab in Townsville conduct research on desert, semi-arid and rangeland environments through our Rangeslands and Savannas Program. CSE staff at the CSIRO Tropical Ecosystems Research Centre focus on the tropical savanna envirnoment of the Australia's north. Current Research CAZR Research - (CAZR Web site) provides many details on current outback sustainability research activities. Rangelands and Savanna Program - co-ordinates research conducted in these environments. Includes projects such as the Outback Institutions Project and the OZFACE project. Native Foods - CSIRO is working in conjunction with Aboriginal communities and Australian industry to learn more about &lsquo;bush tucker&rsquo; and put Australian native foods on the menu. Resources Resources On-line - (CAZR Web site) provides information including research briefing notes and software tools useful for decision making in outback famr and land management. Ecosystem Function Analysis - provides a quick but rigorous method for monitoring the state of landscape. Originally developed for use in rangelands and more recently for other disturbed landscapes such as mine sites, the method has now been broadened to work effectively on any landscape type. Related Links Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority Alice Springs Desert Park Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR) Australian Rangelands Society CSIRO Arid Zone Research Centre Desert Knowledge CRC CSE Research This page last updated 11 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
