 Ladies and Gentlemen, This report is aimed at the Russian Far East Satellite Data Processing Center activities representation. The organization is working under the auspices of the Federal Hydrometeorology and Environment Control Service. The FEDPC(Far East Satellite Data Processing Center) had been processing the satellite data on meteorology, natural resources and oceanography from 1972. The Center is a unique source of the satellite information for the Russian Far East. In 30 years of hard work there was created a database containing satellite photography data with the 45 m(150 ft), 175m(583 ft) and 345 m(1150 ft) resolution. There are satellite survey maps of the Russian Far East territories, Mongolia, northeastern territories of China, Japan and Korea in the database. There are not only special facilities inside Khabarovsk city but also mobile transmitting laboratories making it possible to organize the high level of the satellite data receipt. In 1995 the receipt of the HRPT data from the NOAA satellite was begun. To receive MODIS data the Russia EOScan receiving station was set into operation in the year of 2001. With the MODIS data being available the control over the forest fires conditions, ice conditions in the Russian Far East seawater, snow cover border conditions, environment pollution and flood monitoring became far better in time of quality. The EOScan station is creating data files in the level 0 format(PDS) on receipt. To have this data preprocessed, i.e. converted into level 1/1B layout, the standard IMAPP package is used. The IMAPP was developed by the University of Wisconsin with the NASA support, and then was adapted for the MS Windows by the ScanEx engineering and consulting center. The result of the procedures described is the gauged output data associated to geographical objects. The data of different spatial resolution is placed into different files. To process the MODIS data the ScanEx MODIS Processor is used. This software allows to combine slots of bitmap images into one whole, to convert the image into common geographical projection through the satellite photograph adjustment using the orbit satellite and user data. The software also makes it possible to convert the satellite photograph in a random mode, i.e. user defined mode, of map projection editing. After the image was properly combined, colored and transformed into a projection, associated to the frame of reference, it is exported into one of the most widely know geoinformation systems like ArcInfo, Arcview and Mapinfo. Using the information accumulated in the MODIS database makes it possible to create sea-maps and to combine several dataways with 250,500 m(1667 ft) resolution to create synthetic images, which are then sent via e-mail to ports¡¯ main offices, fishing companies¡¯ offices and directely to sea crafts. To detect fires seats the NASA fire determination algorithm is used. Using the NASA algorithm and the ScanEx MODIS Processor abnormally hot spots on the surface are detected. After the hot spot images is taken it is combined with photographs taken by means of other dataways. The 1 and 2 dataways with 250 m resolution, the 5 and 7 dataways with 500 m resolution and the 20 dataways with 1000 m resolution are used in the combining process. When combined the data from different resolution dataways is transformed and placed into one file which in the output has a greater resolution, e.g. 250m. Thus the ultimate consumer gets two files that of the bitmap format (*.bmp) and file containing geographical associated link with *.tab extension. When opened in Mapinfo application the files demonstrate the synthetic colored image based on the data combination from 5 different satellite dataways. This image allows: 1. to estimate the fire covered area at the moment of the photograph being taken. 2. to observe and estimate the smoke covered area, to detect the direction of the fire spreading. 3. to view the surface layout in 1:800 scale showing the landscape peculiarities which helps to find ways for the fire fighting team efficient most work. 4. to determine the precise place of the fire spot and to estimate the distance to the closest settlement. 5. to estimate the fire burned area. Thus there 19 MODIS dataways are used. There is a serious necessity in the software for ever more effective MODIS data application in specific map making. Having such software would allow to create maps according to the following topics: 1. soil pollution and erosion, forest conditions. 2. Ocean upper surface conditions (surface temperature, diffusive and water surface pollution, phytoplankton allocation). 3. Ozone quantity in the atmosphere, the cloud cover upper border temperature, water content in clouds. 
