 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationCSIRO air guitar in action.Photo by Dr R Helmer, CSIRO TFT.It's not rocket science... it's rockin' scienceCSIRO has built a virtual guitar to showcase its expertise in designing and manufacturing electronic and intelligent textiles with which people effortlessly control computers. Mobile computing How does it work? The capability How CSIRO uses it Who else is involved? Mobile computing As mobile computing spreads into more fields of human activity, the search is on for simpler non-traditional ways of interacting with computers. Intelligent textiles worn by users are strong contenders for this role. Mobile computer users will reap the benefits as researchers at CSIRO create exciting human&#8211;computer interfaces, using their knowledge of advanced intelligent textiles. In a demonstration project intended to put their skills on the line, a team led by Research Engineer Dr Richard Helmer created an objectless musical instrument, or 'air guitar'. 'Freedom of movement is a great feature of these textile-based interfaces,' he says. 'Our air guitar consists of a wearable sensor interface embedded in a conventional 'shirt', with custom software to map gestures with audio samples. It&#8217;s an easy-to-use, virtual instrument that allows real-time music making, even by players without significant musical or computing skills. It allows you to jump around and the sound generated is just like an original mp3.' How does it work? The air guitar works by recognising and interpreting arm movements and relaying this wirelessly to a computer for audio generation. There are no trailing cables to get in way or trip over. Textile motion sensors embedded in the shirt sleeves detect motion when the arm bends - in most cases the left arm chooses a note and the right arm plays it. See a demonstration of the Air guitar Wearable Instrument Shirt and listen to Dr Richard Helmer explain how it works: Wearable guitar instrument shirt interview (video) &#8220;It&#8217;s an easy-to-use, virtual instrument that allows real-time music making, even by players without significant musical or computing skills&#8221; Dr Richard Helmer See and hear the instruments we&#8217;ve played: Wearable instrument shirt: guitar (Video) Wearable instrument shirt: tambourine (video) Wearable instrument shirt: guiro (video) The capability Our expertise in this field includes: knowledge of the physics and chemistry of designing and making fibres and fabrics integration of conductive fibres into fabrics to form sensors design and manufacture of specialised textiles for entertainment, sports, rehabilitation and medical applications integration of technology and know-how in electronics, conductive textile structures, and software to develop next generation textile technologies for personalised human computer interfaces surface modification of textiles to improve device functionality. How CSIRO uses it CSIRO responds quickly to the needs of the marketplace. Electronic textiles have rapidly become platforms for many new personalised technologies, such as mp3 controls and computer keyboards. Commercialisation and acceptance of electronic textile&#160;technologies is proceeding in the sequence: entertainment &#8212; sports &#8212; rehabilitation &#8212; medicine. Next generation devices&#160;will present smart technologies in an intuitive manner that can be readily adopted and used immediately by the consumer. Who else is involved? We are collaborating with a growing list of partner organisations, under confidential commercial arrangements. Find out more about CSIRO's work in&#160;Technical Textiles. Anyone interested in obtaining further information on the Air Guitar may contact the Mailing Group, Air Guitar listed under 'Contact'. Scientist Profile Name:&#160;Dr Richard Helmer Title:&#160;Research Engineer Qualifications:&#160;PhD Expertise:&#160; electronic engineering sensors textile batteries Current projects:&#160; air guitar textile batteries Primary Contact Ms Heather Forward (MBIT)Communications ManagerCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4085 Fax: 61 3 5246 4811 Email: Heather.Forward&#64;csiro.auContact Air Guitar Mailing GroupCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4000 Fax: 61 3 52464057 Email: airguitar&#64;csiro.au© Copyright CSIRO 2006 
