 Technology transfer 24 Environmental Indicators and Sustainable Agriculture
Joe Walker* Abstract
This chapter looks at how indicators can be used to assess agricultural sustainability. Indicators are biophysical, economic and social attributes that can be measured and used to assess the condition and sustainability of the land from the farm to the regional level. Reliable indicators provide signals about the current status of natural resources and how they are likely to change. They can be used to confirm that current farming practices and land-use systems are effective in maintaining the resource base or economic status, identify problems and highlight potential risks. Indicators provide useful information for initiating change or deciding on future on-ground investments. FARMING practices are changing the environmental resource base. Some changes are for the better (e.g. organic farming), but many are deleterious and could endanger future agricultural activities. Rural and urban environmental changes caused by various human activities, not just farming, are increasingly felt, raising perceptions of the environmental costs of these activities. For example, in the cities, people experience poor air quality; some rivers and beaches are no longer fit for recreational use; and valued natural areas have been lost to suburban and industrial development. Farmers and rural inhabitants have seen soil loss through wind and water erosion; they are aware of areas that can no longer be farmed because of crop and pasture decline, and gully development in saline areas. Observation of environmental deterioration in farmed areas is not a recent phenomenon. * CSIRO Land and Water, PO Box 1666, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. Email: joe.walker@csiro.au Walker, J. 2002. Environmental indicators and sustainable agriculture. In: McVicar, T.R., Li Rui, Walker, J., Fitzpatrick, R.W. and Liu Changming (eds), Regional Water and Soil Assessment for Managing Sustainable Agriculture in China and Australia, ACIAR Monograph No. 84, 323–332. 323 Technology transfer Australian farmers in the early 20th century noticed changes that were detrimental to productive agriculture such as an increase in unpalatable grasses and weeds, the advent of saline flows in previously fresh creeks and streams, the need for increased ploughing to retain a tilth in fallowed paddocks and a decline in crop yields and animal production. The signs were there, both visually and in quantifiably reduced yields. Visible undesirable changes in the condition of the atmosphere, land and water are ‘indicators’ of degradation brought about through changes in environmental processes resulting from human activity. The changes may be due to the introduction of new processes (e.g. the addition of pesticides to the soil) or to increases or decreases in existing processes (e.g. more recharge leading to rising watertables in Australia and reduced recharge leading to falling watertables in parts of China). Visual indicators such as soil surface crusting, sheet and gully erosion, and stream and river turbidity have alerted us to problems. Thus, we have been using environmental indicators in agriculture for a long time and the concept is nothing new. However, there has recently been greater recognition of the role that indicators of environmental change could have in assessing and monitoring the effect of land use on natural resources. Indicators can be a powerful means for those managing the land to identify potential problems and assess the effect of their management practices on ecosystems (Walker and Reuter 1996; SCARM 1993; US National Research Foundation 2000; Pykh et al. 1999). Provided that indicators are meaningful to a range of users, from farmers to policy makers, they can help to achieve sustainable agriculture. However, indicators must be selected and used carefully if they are to be effective. Farmers have long used indicators to decide on changes to farm practice. An obvious next step is to develop a more standard, yet simple, way of recording and assessing environmental change that can have immediate application at the farm and catchment levels. Farmers are already ‘production literate’ but they also need to be ‘environmentally literate’. The two literacies working together can help ensure a sustainable future for agriculture. How Can We Define Indicators?
Indicators are a subset of the many possible attributes that could be used to quantify the condition of a particular landscape, catchment or ecosystem (Walker 1998). They can be derived from biophysical, economic, social, management and institutional attributes, and from a range of measurement types. Indicators have been defined as ‘measurable attributes of the environment that can be monitored via field observation, field sampling, remote sensing or compilation of existing data’ (Meyer et al. 1992). Ideally, each indicator is precise and accurate in describing a particular process within the environment and will serve to signal undesirable changes that have occurred or that may occur (Landres 1992). Researchers distinguish several types of indicators. For example, ‘compliance indicators’ identify deviation from previously defined conditions, ‘diagnostic indicators’ identify the specific cause of a problem and ‘early warning indicators’ signal an impending decline of conditions (Cairns and McCormick 1992). It is important to define the purpose of indicators and to select them on the basis of how well they can fulfil the required role. Indicators are perhaps best viewed as communication tools that can turn scientific knowledge into a form better understood by a range of community groups, policy makers and others (Walker et al. 1996). Questions have been raised about the credibility of indicators for resource assessments, but this applies only if indicators are poorly selected. In selecting indicators it is necessary to look at certain criteria such as reliability, interpretability, data availability, established threshold values (needed to set class boundaries) and known links to processes (Walker and Reuter 1996; 324 Technology transfer Jackson et al. 2000). There are better grounds to question the aggregation of indicators into an index (e.g. catchment health rating) or subindex (water quality), since this involves the addition of disparate measures, usually in a simplistic way. Fuzzy approaches (Roberts et al. 1997) offer a possible means to be mathematically correct, but the interpretation of any given index is still an issue. basis for remedial action. Indicators can then be used to monitor the outcomes of whatever action is taken. These steps are depicted in Figure 1. Many of the chapters in this book illustrate the use of indicators in summarising research knowledge. This section examines various issues involved in selecting suitable indicators of catchment and farm health, and in developing appropriate monitoring programs. Steps in Using Environmental Indicators
Indicator development starts with defining a problem—identifying the issues and their value to society. We then ask questions to specify the issues more clearly. This involves making balanced and integrated judgments on the economic, social and environmental condition of a region’s rural enterprises (SCARM 1998). The next step is to choose attributes to use as indicators; for example, current condition (or status) and the direction and magnitude of any change in condition. Certain indicators will be influenced by changes in other indicators, and these interactions must be taken into account. Questions that could be used to determine the specific issues, for example for the grains industry, are: • • • Where is farm productivity falling and the natural resource base declining? Where is farm productivity increasing or stable and the resource base stable? Where is farm productivity improving and the natural resource base declining? Interpreting Indicators at Different Scales
Different spatial scales often require different questions to be asked, requiring different indicator sets and thresholds (Walker et al. 2001). Table 1 illustrates the different kinds of questions asked at different scales. Table 2 lists some of the indicators that are relevant at particular scales. They include single indicators (e.g. soil nitrogen), composite indicators (e.g. cropping on steep slopes as an estimate of erosion risk) and aggregated indexes (e.g. soil moisture index or soil fertility indexes). Data collected in farm surveys can be aggregated and reported at regional and even national level, provided that sampling intensity and measurement quality are adequate and the indicators reflect regional or farm diversity. At the national and State scale (Table 1) the interest is mainly on policy development and identifying ‘hot spots’ that require immediate attention. ‘State of environment’ reporting at the national and State levels are examples. The approach is ‘top-down’: the initiative is taken by people from State and national bodies and the results handed over for implementation. The data used are generally readily available data with little attempt to collect detail. These issues are discussed more fully in Chapter 26. Indicators for regional or local government/ provincial scales could also refer to a particular sector, reflecting concerns about the production and These questions can be asked at individual paddock, catchment and region scales. By using different sets of indicators to answer these questions and by analysing the responses, an assessment report can be produced. If the report shows that current farming practices are having detrimental impacts on the resource base, it can be used as the 325 Technology transfer FARMER/Farming company • Catchment management committee • Community groups, government agencies "What are the soil health (paddock-scale) issues on my farm?" "What are the catchment health (catchment-scale) issues on my farm?" "What are reliable and easy to use on-farm SI for productivity (long term sustainability)?" "What are reliable and easy to use SI for environmental health?" • Integrate information • Examine spatial and temporal trends Develop a report card Monitor and re-evaluate Identify nonsustainable practices and risk issues • Develop action plan and adopt it • Decide what needs to change in property management and in regional (strategic) management ACTION Figure 1. A logical decision tree for using sustainability indicators (SI). economic future of a region. Examples of the kind of information available for indicator development at this scale are given in Section 3 of this Volume. At the farm level, questions refer to specific management problems—how to identify undesirable changes and what action to take. The approach is ‘bottom-up’, with emphasis on selfhelp. The focus is on changing practices at the paddock scale in a way likely to improve farm and catchment health. Examples in this book are found in Chapters 21 and 28. A Structured Approach to Using Sustainability Indicators
Indicators must be relevant, robust and scientifically defensible. There is little point in using indicators that have known weaknesses or that cannot be interpreted reliably. For example, mean soil worm density is difficult to interpret because of regional and seasonal variability; mean soil pH has little meaning at a catchment scale but is useful at a farm scale or for a particular soil landscape. We need to set criteria against which the merits of an indicator can be judged—for example, by rating 326 Technology transfer Table 1. The categories of questions asked at different scales. Regional/catchment scale Top-down approach Farm/site scale Bottom-up approach National scale Top-down approach Purpose of indicators National/State assessment Socioeconomics (resource economics) Policy development Agricultural sustainability Site assessment Socially acceptable economic choices Two-way linking process Social–economic–natural resources On-ground action Condition of the land (paddock) Assessing trends for a farm Whole environment/conservation urban/rural links State of environment (SoE) reporting Agricultural production Indicator programs or groups interested in using them • • • • • • DEST (SoE reporting) State SoE reporting SCARM (sustainability program) ABARE (Outlook conference) ABS (national statistics) Research and development corporations such as LWRRDC, GRDC and RIRDC • State EPAs • • • • • • • • CALP boards Regional land management boards MDBC State water/land/agriculture departments NLP Indicators of catchment health developed by CSIRO ALGA ABARE • • • • • • • • Farmer groups Farm planning groups Land care groups Providers of extension services ACF/SAWCAA Streamwatch Waterwatch Farm 500 Questions 1. How degraded are Australia’s natural resources? 2. Where are the urgent problems? 3. How sustainable are our agricultural practices? 4. What are the broad trends in costs versus profits for agricultural enterprises? 5. What policies can be developed to encourage sustainable agriculture? 1. How can production, quality of life and profits be increased? 2. What methods need to be developed to better manage natural, social and economic resources? 3. What effects are agricultural practices having on natural, social and economic resources? 4. What impacts are social and economic events having on resource management? 1. How can I best manage my farm? 2. How can I make a living on my farm? 3. What sort of life can I have? 4. How can I assess land and water health on my farm? 5. How much will it cost to fix a biophysical/resource depletion problem? ABARE = Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics; ABS = Australian Bureau of Statistics; ACF = Australian Conservation Foundation; ALGA = Australian Local Government Association; CALP boards = catchment and land protection boards; DEST = Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories; EPA = environmental protection agency; GRDC = Grains Research and Development Corporation; LWRRDC = Land and Water Resources Research and Development Corporation; NLP = National Landcare Program; MDBC = Murray–Darling Basin Commission; RIRDC = Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation; SAWCAA = Soil and Water Conservation Association of Australia; SCARM = Standing Committee on Agriculture and Resource Management; SoE = State of environment 327 Technology transfer Table 2. Scale National Examples of linkages between issues, sustainability indicators and scales. Issue Average real net farm income Access to key services Sustainability indicator Farmer’s terms of trade Distance to regional centres Trends in water quality Trends in silo protein levels for wheat % farmers using property management plans % land affected by salinity Condition and extent of native vegetation State Agricultural industry Health of river basins Meeting commodity market specifications Farmer’s skills Region Health of rural environments Catchment Meeting water quality targets Trends in water quality % area with protected riparian vegetation Farm Optimising farm returns Planning the annual farm business Disposable income per family Forecast trends in commodity prices % potential yield or $ water use efficiency Reliable soil tests Paddock Yield performance Soil health assessment each indicator in terms of relevance, ease of capture and reliability. Table 3, which broadly follows Jackson et al. (2000) and Walker et al. (2000), summarises the criteria for selecting reliable sustainability indicators. Threshold guidelines for resource condition
Figure 2 shows how a hypothetical resource indicator in an agroecosystem might change with time. Initially, sample values vary within accepted thresholds. For example, even if a system has been changed from a natural to a managed agroecosystem, it may be performing within acceptable limits. Such a system is considered stable (e.g. not leaking nutrients or water to streams or groundwater systems) within the set thresholds. This is the concept of ‘conditional stability’ developed by Walker (1999). In later years, values may move outside threshold limits. For example, increased electrical conductivity could signal increasing salinity in soil or streams, or decreased soil nitrogen levels could indicate nutrient depletion under intensive cropping regimes. The main problem is in setting threshold values that apply nationally. Some thresholds are well defined (e.g. some water quality measures are related to human health), but values are more difficult to set in landscapes and catchments. Values are known to vary regionally and thresholds vary with spatial scale. This variability makes the idea of setting environmental targets difficult to define absolutely. A suite of indicators is needed to examine changes in resource condition. For example, commercial soil sampling services offer clients multiple tests on each sample submitted. The results can then be 328 Technology transfer Table 3. Criteria Reliability Challenges for selecting reliable sustainability indicators (SIs). Challenges Is a standard method available to measure the SI? Are low errors associated with measurement? Is the SI measurement stable? Can the SI be interpreted and ranked reliably? Does the SI respond to change or disturbance? Is the SI accepted by farming communities? Data capture and cost Can SI data be easily captured? Is the data capture at low cost? Does the SI need to be monitored regularly? Ranking and assessment Can the SI data be mapped or graphed? Can SI assessments be integrated soundly in space and time? Do previous SI data exist? Benchmarking farm business health
Nonsustainable Upper limit Resource property Sustainable (desirable range) Lower limit Nonsustainable Time (years) Figure 2. Conceptual diagram showing the requirement for validated upper and lower limits to assess temporal trends (A, B) in a resource property (indicator values) (Reuter 1998). The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) has defined economic indicators of farm performance (ABARE 1999). These are derived as complex national or industry indexes, or estimated from aggregated data from various sources such as annual ABARE farm surveys, the Australian agricultural census and agricultural financial surveys from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). ABARE and ABS publish regular updates showing trends for economic indicators. Dealing with large annual variations
compared to relevant guidelines1 and used to summarise trends. Farmers and their advisers can carry out these tests themselves at relatively low cost using practical ‘do-it-yourself’ test kits. Kits are available through the Western Australian Farm Management Society and Charles Sturt University. Rengasamy and Bourne (1997) have also developed a kit for assessing soil salinity, acidity and sodicity. When there are large annual variations in indicator values, it is important to know the trends over time. Many economic indicators, such as disposable income per family or profit at full equity, vary greatly from year to year through the combined effects of seasonal weather conditions, shifts in commodity prices and other market forces (e.g. interest rates). For these indicators, trends in data, acquired annually, should be assessed at constant dollar value over several years or decades to understand the magnitude and direction of longer term changes. The impact of rainfall on economic indicators can be partly circumvented by expressing data in units of 1 For example, there are Australian guidelines for interpreting soil (Peverill et al. 1999), plant (Reuter and Robinson 1997) and water quality tests for assessment of stream condition (Ladson and White 1999). 329 Technology transfer rainfall received in any given season—the so-called dollar water use efficiency ($WUE) indicator. National assessments of sustainable agriculture
The Standing Committee on Agricultural Resource Management (SCARM) published a series of reports during the 1990s. These culminated in a pioneering but incomplete report on the assessment of sustainable agriculture in Australia’s 11 agroecological zones. Initially, ‘sustainable agriculture’ was defined and guiding principles were developed for assessing the level of sustainability achieved by the agricultural sector (SCA 1991). Subsequently, an indicator framework was devised for making these assessments (SCARM 1993). A pilot feasibility study was undertaken to evaluate the validity and availability of data for these indicators (SLWRMC 1996). A final report
Table 4. (SCARM 1998) documented the data and trends. Table 4 lists the indicators used by SCARM to assess sustainability in Australian agriculture. It also lists possible indicators that were not identified in the report but are now acknowledged to be important for a complete assessment of sustainable agriculture in Australia. Some of these indicators are now used in the National Land and Water Resources Audit. Comparing Different Condition or Sustainability Assessments
It is often useful to compare agricultural performance with catchment condition or with other indexes (e.g. economic or social indexes). Figure 3 shows a cross-comparison matrix of ranked assessments of farm production and ranked assessments of catchment condition. The focus in the figure is on combinations that do not conform to expected (i.e. the diagonal). For example, if a Composite indicators and attributes used by SCARM (1998) to assess sustainability in Australian agriculture, together with some additional attributes required for a more complete assessment. Attributes assessed by SCARM (1998) • • • • • • • • • • • • • • Real net farm income Total factor productivity Farmer's terms of trade Average real net farm income Debt servicing ratio Phosphate and potassium balance Soil condition: acidity and sodicity Rangeland condition and trend Diversity of agricultural plant species Water use by vegetation Chemical residues in products Salinity in streams Dust storm index Impact of agriculture on native vegetation Attributes not assessed by SCARM (1998) • Costs of land degradation • Costs and benefits from remediating degraded resources • $ water use efficiency (for rainfed and irrigated farms) • • • • • Nitrogen and sulfur balances Extent of soil structural decline Level of groundwater reserve exploitation Extent of land salinisation Assessment of catchment condition SCARM indicators Long-term real net farm income Natural resource condition Off-site environmental impacts Managerial skills • Impacts of soil erosion on river water quality • Extent of nonreserve native vegetation on farms • Adoption by industry of best management practices • Extent of farmer access to the internet • Capacity of rural communities to change • Extent of diversification within rural regions • Extent to which current infrastructure, policies and laws support sustainable agriculture • Level of farmer education • Extent of participation in training and Landcare • Implementation of sustainable practices • Age structure of the agricultural workforce • Access to key services Socioeconomic impacts 330 Technology transfer catchment is biophysically in poor condition and production is high, the system is probably maintained by high inputs of fertiliser and may not be environmentally sustainable. The matrix, which was developed by Walker et al. (2000), is not meant to show causal relationships, but suggests where more investigation is needed. It is particularly useful in broadly comparing biophysical indexes with production, economic and social indexes and in interpreting sustainability at catchment and regional scales. The matrix is based on a list of core indicators for benchmarking economic and resource health within catchments (Walker and Reuter 1996). The initial list was drawn up in 1996; other indicators were added following a national workshop (see Table 3 in Reuter 1998). Conclusion
Most programs involved in monitoring and assessing environmental condition are ultimately associated with issues of sustainability. The word ‘sustainability’ has many connotations, including longevity, continuity, function and stability. There are thus different questions to ask and different approaches available. Process-based models have a place and also have limitations; so do indicators. Process-based models, as illustrated in other chapters in this book, can be useful to develop a range of scenarios, but in the context of indicators they can be particularly useful in setting workable threshold values. Unfortunately, many process modellers and reductionist scientists have relegated environmental indicators to the soft sciences, little Underperforming Possible opportunity for major production improvement; needs application of new technologies; new approaches Possibly underperforming Better management of existing land uses should improve production; apply best management practice Catchment condition Good Best scenario Current land uses likely to be appropriate Underperforming Changes to existing land uses and some remediation may improve both production and condition Marginally sustainable Changes to existing land uses and production systems needed. Good area to target for landscape redesign Unsustainable Early warning of problems; minor changes to existing land uses required; most likely to respond well to limited investment Moderate Poor Resource indebted Restructuring needed; new enterprises needed; landscape stabilisation a priority Unsustainable Restructuring or large investment needed; possibly long time needed to get response Highly unsustainable Urgent warning of potential major problems; serious landscape redesign and investment needed Poor Moderate Agricultural production Good Figure 3. Possible interpretation of the catchment condition–agricultural production cross-comparison matrix. 331 Technology transfer realising that indicators have a process base. This attitude is usually based on ignorance about the derivation and use of indicators. The establishment of the new journal Environmental Indicators2 will help to establish indicators as a credible systems approach to sustainability issues. Reuter, D.J. and Robinson J.B. 1997. Plant Analysis: An Interpretation Manual, 2nd edition. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing. Roberts, D.W., Dowling, T.I. and Walker, J. 1997. FLAG: A Fuzzy Landscape Analysis GIS Method for Dryland Salinity Assessment. CSIRO, Land and Water Technical Report 8/97, Canberra, July 1997. SCA (Standing Committee on Agriculture). 1991. Sustainable Agriculture. SCA technical report series No. 36. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing. SCARM (Standing Committee on Agricultural and Resource Management) 1993. Sustainable Agriculture: Tracking the Indicators for Australia and New Zealand. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing. SCARM 1998. Sustainable Agriculture: Assessing Australia’s Recent Performance. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing. SLWRMC (Sustainable Land and Water Resource Management Committee) 1996. Indicators for Sustainable Agriculture: Evaluation of Pilot Testing. SLWRMC, April.1996, CSIRO Publishing. US NRC (National Research Council). 2000. Ecological Indicators for the Nation. Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 180 pp. Walker, J. 1998. Environmental indicators of catchment and farm health. In: Williams, J., Hook, R.A. and Gascoigne, H.L., eds, Farming Action Catchment Reaction: the Effects of Dryland Farming on the Natural Environment. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing, 99–117. Walker, J. 1999. Conditional health indicators as a proxy for sustainability indicators. In: Pykh, Y.A., Hyatt, D.E. and Lenz, R.J.M., eds, Advances in Sustainable Development: Environmental Indices a Systems Analysis Approach. Oxford, UK, EOLSS Publishing Co. Ltd, 349–362. Walker, J. and Reuter, D.J. (eds) 1996. Indicators of Catchment Health: A Technical Perspective. Collingwood, Victoria, CSIRO Publishing. Walker, J., Alexander, D., Irons, C., Jones, B., Penridge, H. and Rapport, D. 1996. Catchment health indicators: an overview. In: Walker, J. and Reuter, D.J., eds, Indicators of Catchment Health: A Technical Perspective. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing, 3–18. Walker, J., Veitch, S., Braaten, R., Dowling, T., Guppy, L. and Herron, N. 2000. Catchment Condition in Australia: an Assessment at the National Scale. A discussion paper for the National Land and Water Resources Audit (Project 7/8). Walker, J., Veitch, S., Braaten, R., Dowling, T., Guppy, L. and Herron, N. 2001. Catchment Condition in Australia. Final Report to the National Land and Water Resources Audit, November, 2001. References
ABARE (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics) 1999. Performance indicators for the grains industry. In: Australian Grains Industry Performance by Grains Research and Development Corporation Agroecological Zones, 15–21. Cairns, J. and McCormick, P.V. 1992. Developing an ecosystembased capability for ecological risk assessments. The Environmental Professional, 14, 186–96. Jackson, L.A., Kuartz, J.C. and Fisher, W.S. 2000. Review of EPA evaluation guidelines for ecological indicators. EPA/600/390/060. Ladson, A.R. and White, L. 1999. An index of stream condition: reference manual. Victoria, Waterways Unit Department of Natural Resources and Environment. Landres, P.B. 1992. Ecological indicators: panacea or liability? In: McKenzie, D.H., Hyatt, D.E. and McDonald, V.J., eds, Ecological Indicators, Vol. 2. New York, Elsevier Applied Science, 1295–318. Meyer, J.R., Cambell, C.L., Moser, T.J., Hess, G.R., Rawlings, J.O., Peck, S. and Heck, W.W. 1992. Indicators of the ecological status of agroecosystems. In: McKenzie, D.H., Hyatt, D.E. and McDonald, V.J., eds, Ecological Indicators, Vol. 2. New York, Elsevier Applied Science, 628–58. Peverill, K.I., Sparrow, L.A. and Reuter, D.J. 1999. Soil Analysis: an Interpretation Manual. Melbourne, CSIRO Publishing. Pykh, Y.A., Hyatt, D.E. and Lenz, R.J.M., eds 1999. Advances in Sustainable Development: Environmental Indices Systems Analysis Approach. Oxford, EOLSS Publishers. Rengasamy, P. and Bourne, J. 1997. Managing sodic, acid and sodic soils. Co-operative Research Centre for Soil and Land Management SAS 8/97, Adelaide. Reuter, D.J. 1998. Developing indicators for monitoring catchment health: the challenges. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture, 38, 637–48. 2 www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolind 332 
