 CAZR Home About CAZR News, Events, Jobs Australia's Arid Land Research Sustainable Pastoral Industries Regional Conservation Planning Landscape Resilience and Monitoring Sustainable use of Aboriginal Lands Regional Modelling and Profiles Resources Education Skills and Expertise Contact Details Site Map CSE Home CSIRO Home CAZR Research Overview Project examples Research focus areas Quick links Biograze EcoRange Remote Sensing of Deserts More project reports available from the resources section. Research overview CAZR's research involves the ecology and management of the arid and semi-arid rangelands of Australia. These are dominated in area by the pastoral industry, Aboriginal lands and conservation reserves, but dominated in economic output by mining and tourism. Australia's rangelands are also subject to a wide range of newly diversified land uses, most of which occur on small areas. Pressures internationally and nationally mean that the traditional industries of the rangelands are changing the ways in which they operate, becoming non-viable in some areas, accessing new markets from others. Many regions are suffering social and economic disruption in this process, and all regions need to chart clearer courses during this new century. We work with land managers, industries and policy makers to contribute to better planning, use, and management of the rangelands and to avoid the poorly implemented development that has occurred in many areas. We conduct research to better understand how ecosystems respond to disturbances such as fire, grazing, and climate and to develop a more integrated view of the economic, environmental and social trade-offs of land use at enterprise and regional scales. Research framework - pdf file (755 Kb) Project examples The following project examples represent projects that have on-line material available. Remote sensing of deserts: This CD Rom report was produced in 1998 by the former CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology at Alice Springs, for the Global Research Network Systems (GRNS) Desertification working group. Research focus areas Research operates are focused on five key areas, with different levels of investment in each: A sustainable pastoral industry Regional conservation planning Landscape resilience and monitoring Sustainable use of Aboriginal lands Regional modelling, participatory processes and rangeland profiles A sustainable pastoral industry Related sections: Australia's Arid Lands, Skills and Expertise This page last updated 29 November, 2005 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
