 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationIntelligent kneesleeve device being tested on athlete.Talking textiles take out an awardThe Intelligent Knee Sleeve, used to teach people the correct way to perform movement skills to reduce the risk of injury, takes out a NSW Sports Safety Gold Medal.
Collaboration wins sports safety award What CSIRO did What is the Intelligent Knee Sleeve? Sports performance enhancement Rehabilitation from injury Partners Collaboration wins sports safety award A NSW Sports Safety Gold Medal Award 2004 was awarded to the Intelligent Knee Sleeve team at CSIRO in collaboration with the University of Wollongong&#8217;s Biomechanics Research Laboratory for an 'Outstanding achievement in applied research in Sports Medicine by a research team' for the development of an innovative product designed to reduce sports-related injury. Members of the project team included: from the CSIRO: Dr Bill Humphries Mrs Bridget Munro Mr Brendan D&#8217;Arcy Mr Michael Mestrovic Dr Ian Blanchonette Ms Jan Hair Dr Mark Looney Mr Peter Waters Mrs Pam Petersen from the University of Wollongong: Prof. Julie Steele Prof. Gordon Wallace and team What CSIRO did CSIRO established a collaborative project&#160;wtih two departments within the&#160;University of Wollongong -&#160;The&#160;Intelligent Polymer Research Institute (IPRI) and the Biomechanics Research Laboratory, to develop an Intelligent Knee Sleeve device for injury prevention and rehabilitation. What is the Intelligent Knee Sleeve? Textile sensors can be used to teach people the correct way to perform movement skills to reduce their risk of injury. The Intelligent Knee Sleeve is a biofeedback device that monitors the wearer's knee joint motion during activity. The device consists of a fabric sleeve that fits over the knee similar to a conventional knee guard, on which are mounted a disposable electronic fabric strain sensor and a signal processing system. As the knee bends, the electrical resistance of the fabric sensor changes, and when the knee joint reached the correct angle for safe landing, the signal processor emits an audible beep. When used in training the beep provides athletes with real-time feedback about lower limb orientation during jumping and landing and reinforces the correct landing technique. The Intelligent Knee Sleeve is one application of a new technology that has the potential to be further developed for a wide range of healthcare related products for: training rehabilitation physiotherapy human performance monitoring. Sports performance enhancement Technique is often the key to success in most sporting pursuits. Textile sensors can be used to enhance performance and increase efficiency of motion by assisting people to learn the optimal way to perform skills involving precise limb orientation. Rehabilitation from injury The primary goals of rehabilitation following injury or surgery are to regain full joint range of motion and to recover muscle strength and neuromuscular control. Textile sensors can be incorporated into wearable sensing systems to assist patients to learn how to move their joints through a desirable range of motion throughout typical rehabilitation exercises to improve the rate of recovery. Partners The University of Wollongong's, Intelligent Polymer Research Institute and their Biomechanics Research Laboratory combined their intelligent polymer&#160;knowledge with CSIRO's expertise in applying polymers to textile products. Find out more about&#160;Integrating electronics into smart textiles. Commercial Information Project title: Intelligent Knee Sleeve Areas involved: CSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre Technology: Advanced Materials Electronics Polymer Chemistry&#160; Partners: University of Wollongong, Intelligent Polymer Research Institute University of Wollongong, Biomechanics Research Laboratory Principal scientists: Dr Ian Blanchonette Dr Bill Humphries Primary Contact Dr Ian BlanchonetteResearch ScientistCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4042 Fax: 61 3 5246 4057 Email: Ian.Blanchonette&#64;csiro.auContact Ms Heather Forward (MBIT)Communications ManagerCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4085 Fax: 61 3 5246 4811 Email: Heather.Forward&#64;csiro.auLocation Textile &amp; Fibre Technology - BelmontColac RoadBelmont VIC 3216AustraliaTechnology Geelong LaboratoriesPO Box 21Belmont VIC 3216Australia© Copyright CSIRO 2006 
