 About CSIRO Doing Business Education Publications Enquiries Search Computational Fluid Dynamics Overview Applications FEM SPH DEM Software Fastflo Publications Staff Links Computational Fluid Dynamics Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics - Application Multi-material heat transfer and fluid flow in an electric arc furnace Contact personnel: P.W. Cleary, J. Ha One example of an electric arc furnace consists of a cast silica refactory containing a cast iron bath, with a carbon electrode protruding from the top of the furnace. The space above the bath is filled with a nitrogen atmosphere. An electric current is passed through the electrode into the cast iron bath, generating an arc in the air gap between them. Schematic diagram of the electric arc furnace The dynamics of the electric arc furnace is very complex, comprised of heat conduction in the electrode, bath and refractory, as well as fluid motion and heat generation and convection in the molten bath and atmosphere. The numerical simulation of an electric arc furnace is further complicated by the presence of two vastly different time scales, with the convective time scale being much faster than the conductive time scale for the refractory. Preliminary numerical simulations, using the SPH method, have been undertaken for a two-dimensional model of the electric arc furnace. Two different models for the cast iron bath were considered: the first assuming a solid bath, and the second with a liquid bath. The diagrams below show examples of the temperature in the different regions calculated using these two models at selected times. Temperature in the different domains of the electric arc furnace (left: solid bath; right: liquid bath) These simulations illustrate that the SPH method is able to treat in a natural way combined heat and mass flow in connected multi-domain regions. The free surface between the cast iron bath and nitrogen atmosphere has be calculated; while in the present example, the motion of the free surface is rather simple, more complex features - such as sloshing and splashing due to the introduction of gas flows or electromagnetic stirring - could also be captured by the SPH simulations. To top last updated May 24, 2002 12:02 PM CMIS-CFD Webmaster 
 © Copyright 2007, CSIRO Australia Use of this web site and information available from it is subject to our Legal Notice and Disclaimer and Privacy Statement 
