 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchProgramsTropical Landscapes Sustaining Ecosystem Processes Tropical Landscapes Home Integrated Landscape Management Tropical Biodiversity Sustaining Ecosystem Processes Vertebrate Management Sustainable Intensive Production Resilient Agri-Industry Supply Chains Skills &amp; Expertise Program Contacts Sustaining Ecosystem Processes Influential planning and management strategies that inform policies and practices for sustaining ecosystem processes in altered and changing tropical environments. The Issues Current projects The Issues Sustainable management of tropical rainforests requires an understanding of their interactions with other parts of the tropical landscape. These interactions are not purely ecological but also include social and economic aspects. Our goal is to: acquire a better understanding of the ecological properties and processes in time and space that is needed to underpin sustainable utilisation; predict the impacts of land cover change and other drivers of change on ecosystem properties and processes; and provide the critical information and tools required to develop management plans aimed at the conservation of ecosystem processes and biodiversity, both in continuous tracts of habitat such as the Wet Tropics World Heritage Area and in fragmented agricultural landscapes, in the face of rapid climate change. Current projects Measuring and Mapping Key Forest Processes in the Wet Tropics &ndash; understanding processes such as primary production, aspects of nutrient cycles etc. that provide critical ecosystem services. Contact: David Hilbert Secondary rainforests in the Wet Tropics (Tropical Forest Research Centre Web site) &ndash; spatial ecology of plant regeneration after disturbance. Contact: Jessie Wells Seed Dispersal in the Wet Tropics &ndash; quantitative description of seed dispersal for incorporation into models of community dynamics in both continuous and fragmented parts of the landscape for vegetation management and weed control. Contact: David Westcott Seed Dispersal of Environmental and Agricultural Weeds &ndash; applying knowledge of seed dispersal processes to management of environmental and agricultural weeds. Contact: David Westcott Climate Change Impacts to Biodiversity in the Wet Tropics &ndash; providing critical information and tools to develop management plans for conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem processes, in the face of rapid climate change. Contact: David Hilbert Land Use Impacts on Water Quality (Tropical Forest Research Centre Web site) &ndash; gaining an understanding of the stocks, pathways and flows of water and nutrients within and through tropical forest landscapes. This project is operating in collaboration with CSIRO Land and Water. Contact: David McJannett Vertebrate Management This page last updated 1 May, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
