 Global Development Wise and Healthy Agriculture CSIRO is involved in all aspects of agriculture – textiles, fibre, forestry, pest and pesticide control, quarantine and contamination, food production and storage, fisheries, crops and livestock. The projects often impact on trade and standards issues with implications for both thehost country and Australia. Regional planning of barramundi fisheries in Papua New Guinea
In the early 1990s, there was a dramatic decline in the CSIRO Global Development number and abundance the economically important barramundi in the Ok Tedi and upper river and mid Fly river of Papua New Guinea. Both rivers are the recipients of fine sediments from the tailings and overburden of the Ok Tedi gold and copper mine. ‘The coastal barramundi fishery relies on the annual spawning migration of fish from the Fly River to the coastal breeding ground, In the early 1990s the fishery collapsed. We thought the decline may have been due to overfishing,’ Barramundi are the most commercially-valuable fish species in Western Province and are especially important to villages along the middle Fly River which do not have direct access to markets for most of their garden produce. CSIRO Marine Research fisheries ecologist Dr David Milton studied barramundi collected at the junction of the Ok Tedi and Fly rivers. The absence of elevated copper concentrations in fish taken from the confluence of the Ok Tedi and Fly rivers suggests that much of the copper, a main by- product from the mine, is not bio-available. Studies in other countries have shown that much of the copper in the rivers is complexed with dissolved organic matter and is not expected to be toxic to aquatic life. The Environment Department of Ok Tedi Mining Ltd has been monitoring the impacts of mining activities on the Fly River since 1983..
strontium and barium in their earbones, which revealed whether the fish had migrated between freshwater and seawater. The majority of breeding barramundi caught in the coastal breeding grounds in the Gulf of Papua had in fact remained in the coastal waters, rather than migrating up the Fly River. Most fish caught in the Fly River, in contrast, had migrated from coastal nurseries into the river, where they remained. ‘Low catch rates in the mid-1990s appears to be due Tracing fish movements But this didn’t explain the dive in barramundi stocks in 1990. ‘The coastal barramundi fishery relies on the annual spawning migration of fish from the Fly River to the coastal breeding ground,’ Dr Milton says. ‘In the early 1990s the fishery collapsed. We thought the decline may have been due to overfishing, but we were still seeing plenty of fish in the river.’ Dr Milton collected fish from different rivers and coastal areas and examined the concentrations of to consistently poor breeding success and migration in consecutive years,’ Dr Milton says. ‘This may have been due to the El Niño in the late 1980s and early 1990s, which could have dried out the swampy coastal habitat essential for the survival of larval and juvenile barramundi.’ Milton says that with increased rainfall in recent years, breeding has been more successful. Populations of barramundi have since bounced back and strong migrations are evident. CSIRO Global Development www.csiro.au Other CSIRO projects in the area of Wise and Healthy Agriculture include:
• • Rodent Control in SE Asia (Sustainable Ecosystems, AusAID, ACIAR) New attack on Foot and Mouth by leading a global consortium approach (Livestock Industries, FAO, IAEA, AusAID, ACIAR) • • • Taro Beetle Management in PNG and Fiji (Entomology, ACIAR) Control of bees and bee mites in Indonesia and the Philippines (Entomology, ACIAR) Development of a sustainable, community-based essential oil industry in the Western Province of Papua New Guinea using the region's woody-plant species (Forestry and Forest Products, AusAID, ACIAR) • • Control of gemini virus diseases of cotton and tomato in Pakistan and Australia (Plant Industry, ACIAR) Developing a Computer-assisted Learning (CAL) System to Improve Training of Staff in Grain Quality Management in the ASEAN Region Quality Assurance in Agricultural Produce (Entomology, AusAID, ACIAR) • • • Africa: River Blindness Drug (Livestock Industries, WHO) Peas With In-Built Weevil Resistance (Plant Industry, ACIAR) Offsite Effects of Pesticides in the Philippines and Australia (Mathematical and Information Sciences, ACIAR) • Biology and status of the prawn stocks and trawl fishery in the Gulf of Papua (Marine Research, ACIAR) • Indonesia and Australia working together to improve tuna fisheries management (Marine Research, ACIAR) • • • • • • • • • • • • Molecular Fisheries Laboratory Artisanal sharks and rays in Eastern Indonesia (Marine Research, ACIAR) Sustaining prawns in the padi (Marine Research, ACIAR) Mud Crab Aquaculture in Australia and Southeast Asia (Marine Research, ACIAR) Community-based management of the Terubuk fishery in Riau, Indonesia (Marine Research, ACIAR) Biology, fishery assessment and management of shared snapper fisheries in northern Australia and eastern Indonesia (Marine Research, ACIAR) Technology for sustainable grazing cropping systems southern Africa (Sustainable Ecosystems, ACIAR) India: Megatonnes more milk (Livestock Industries, ACIAR) Prospects for improved integration of high quality forages in the crop-livestock systems of Sulawesi, Indonesia (Sustainable Ecosystems, ACIAR) Soybean variety adaptation and improvement in Vietnam and Australia (Sustainable Ecosystems, Plant Industry, ACIAR) Giraffe food to transform cattle industry (Sustainable Ecosystems, Livestock Industry, ACIAR) Ticks and parasites, with cheap stable vaccines and working to manufacture them in developing countries (Livestock Industries) Development of a vaccine for the control of Gumboro in village and small poultry holdings in Indonesia (Livestock Industries, ACIAR) Contact Us
Phone Email Web 1800 363 400 enquiries@csiro.au www.csiro.au For further information about Global Development (globaldevelopment@csiro.au)
Director, CSIRO Global Development Dr. Vijoleta Braach-Maksvytis Phone +61 2 9490 8154 Email Vijoleta.braach-maksvytis@csiro.au www.csiro.au/globalaid Operations Manager, CSIRO Global Development Dr. Peter Osman Mobile +61 0411 440 339 Email peter.osman@csiro.au www.csiro.au/globalaid © CSIRO. Disclaimer: CSIRO shall not be liable for technical or editorial omissions contained herein. The information is provided in the best of faith but is subject to change without notice. 
