 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationDr Peter Newton undertakes research to improve urban sustainability.Dr Peter Newton: improving the sustainability of Australian citiesDr Peter Newton’s research focuses on revitalising Australian cities through developing new generation technologies and integrated planning and management solutions. Current activities Background Academic qualifications Achievements Current activities Dr Peter Newton leads the Urban Systems research program at CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems (CSE), based at CSIRO&#8217;s Highett Laboratories in Victoria.&#160;This Program is developing new generation technologies and integrated infrastructure solutions to minimise the environmental impact of built facilities and create healthier and more productive living and working spaces by reducing the urban ecological footprint and improving infrastructure efficiency. Dr Newton is also the Director of the Sustainable Built Assets Program at the Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) for Construction Innovation. Background Dr Newton&#8217;s&#160;expertise in urban systems, particularly in the areas of geomatics, forecasting (technology, population), urban systems modelling, environmental assessment, sustainability science, state of environment and sustainability reporting research has been recognised nationally and internationally. &#160; From 1990-93, Dr Newton was Co-director of Telstra's Centre of Expertise in Geographic Information Systems and Analysis, a Telstra-funded research centre including the Telstra Research Laboratories, the University of Tasmania and CSIRO. Dr Newton's expertise in urban systems research has been recognised nationally and internationally. In 1994, Dr Newton was appointed Program Manager for CSIRO Infrastructure Systems. Concurrently he was also Associate Director of the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute (1994-99), a federally funded initiative.&#160;&#160; Within the university environment, he has held the position of Adjunct Professor at the Queensland University of Technology School of Design and Built Environment (2000-04) and other faculty positions at the universities of Newcastle New South Wales, Canterbury, New Zealand, and Waterloo, Canada. Dr Newton has held several senior CSIRO science management positions, including his current role as Program Leader of CSIRO's&#160;Urban Systems research program, and&#160;prior to that Chief Scientist at CSIRO Manufacturing and Infrastructure Technology. Academic qualifications Dr Newton received his Master of Arts from the University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia&#160;and his Doctor of Philosophy in urban systems modelling from the University of Canterbury, New Zealand. Achievements Dr Newton is author of numerous peer-reviewed publications, including: 20 books&#160;and monographs 51 book chapters 29 refereed journal papers 16 refereed conference proceedings. Dr Newton's work has also delivered the following research outputs: LCADesign: world-first tool to automate eco-efficiency assessment of buildings and infrastructure, 2003 CAD Conferencing: world-first real-time collaborative design tool for use over broadband networks, 1992 State of Environment Reports for the Australian Government, 1996, 2001 and 2006 Desktop Planning: computer-based systems for urban planning, 1985 articulating fly-in fly-out program for Australia&#8217;s remote mining towns, 1977 advances in remote community planning and design, 1980s several books published on understanding the linkage between technology change and urban form and development. Dr Newton has also held positions on several state and national industry and government advisory boards and committees. Currently he is a board member of the International Council for Research and Innovation in Building and Construction. Read more about&#160;CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems. Scientist Profile Name: Dr Peter Newton Title: Program Leader Qualifications: MA PhD Expertise: urban systems modelling geomatics forecasting (technology and&#160;populations) environmental assessment sustainability science state of environment and sustainability reporting Primary Contact Ms Angela KirkmanMarketing &amp; Communication ManagerCSIRO Sustainable EcosystemsPhone: 61 7 3214 2669 Fax: 61 7 3214 2308 Email: Angela.Kirkman&#64;csiro.auLocation Highett VIC SiteGraham RoadHighett VIC 3190AustraliaPO Box 56Highett VIC 3190Australia© Copyright CSIRO 2006 
