 About CSIRO Doing Business Education Publications Enquiries Search Computational Fluid Dynamics Overview Applications FEM SPH DEM Software Fastflo Publications Staff Links Computational Fluid Dynamics Finite Element Method - Application using Fastflo Two-phase flow in a stirred tank Contact personnel: Z. Zhu, A.N. Stokes Liquid in a cylindrical mixing tank is stirred by a Rushton turbine, and gas is released into the tank through a sparger mounted along the axis below the turbine. There are baffles mounted on the cylindrical wall of the tank. At normal working conditions, the two-phase flow in the mixing tank is highly turbulent. In this case, the liquid-water flow pattern is simulated numerically. The distributions of the gas volume fraction and velocity are also predicted. The vessel considered is an Applicon 151. The rotating speed of the turbine is 360 RPM, and the speed at which air is released into the liquid is 1.7 m/s. The Reynolds number of the flow is Re = 118000, based on the tip velocity of the turbine blades and the radius of the mixing tank. Computed velocity vectors (left) and temperature contours (right). Computations The two-phase turbulent flow inside the mixing tank is modelled as axisymmetric. The tangential velocity in the region covered by the turbine blades is assumed to be that of a rotating solid body, the axial and radial velocity components are determined by the momentum Navier-Stokes equations for all fluid regions including the region occupied by the turbine blades and the baffles. An extra viscous term is added to the momentum equations in the baffle region. A hybrid method based on a SIMPLE-type algorithm and artificial compressibility is used to solve for the liquid velocity and pressure. The gas velocity is solved using a two-step convection-diffusion operator-splitting method. The following models are used in the simulation: Two-fluid model to account for the two-phase flow. Models for interfacial drag, added virtual mass and interfacial lifting forces. RNG k-e model for turbulence effect. As the flow is axisymmetric, only half of the cross-section needs to be resolved. This half cross-section is discretized with 2000 linear triangle elements. The liquid phase flow converges within the first 120 iterations, while 600 iterations are needed to reach a converged solution for the gas phase flow. On a DEC 3000 Alpha workstation, the simulation of the two-phase flow takes 16 hours in CPU time. Results The computed velocity vector arrows of the liquid are shown in the right half cross-section of the above figure. The velocity arrows illustrate the complex nature of the liquid flow inside the agitated mixing tank. The impeller blades push the liquid radially toward the outer wall. As a result, two large recirculating regions are formed. Also shown in the above figure are the temperature contours computed using Fastflo. The Fastflo results have also been compared with experimental data; good agreement has been observed for the radial air velocity profiles. References [1] K.E. Morud and B.H. Hjertager, LDA measurements and CFD modelling of gas-liquid flow in a stirred vessel, Chemical Engineering Sciences, 51, 233- 249 (1996). [2] Z. Zhu and A.N. Stokes, Simulation of two phase flows in a stirred mixing tank, International Conference on CFD in Mineral and Metal Processing and Power Generation, Melbourne, Australia (1997). To top last updated May 24, 2002 11:49 AM CMIS-CFD Webmaster 
 © Copyright 2007, CSIRO Australia Use of this web site and information available from it is subject to our Legal Notice and Disclaimer and Privacy Statement 
