 PRINT Transcript: Nano textiles Traditionally, fashion has not been a priority in the discipline of science. Now, I know this must shock you, because I'm obviously such a trendsetter. Uhh! Hah. But have you ever wondered how clothes are actually made? Well, we have. (I'll take the white one.) When it comes to fabric, the threads are small enough, so just imagine how small the technology is inside those threads. Hi, I'm Roberto Calati, an electronic engineer with Nanotechnology Victoria. The textiles industry is using nanotechnology to create and enhance innovative new materials that are wrinkle-free and stain-free, and can even change colour. When it comes to making clothes with nanotechnology, fashion is not the only thing to consider. With more and more people riding bikes, safety is a key issue. Imagine a jacket or bag that has easy-to-see glowing light strips. Well, here it is. This is a commuter bag and jacket that uses a conductive, light-emitting polymer film for added safety. The polymer film is sandwiched between thin, invisible, nanostructured electrodes. When an electric current passes through the film, it emits light, or electroluminescence. The polymers are lightweight and flexible, and emit little heat, so their future applications will be many. Nanotechnology is pretty cool, but how on earth can it stop these feet from smelling? With these! These socks are made from Eco-fabric. They contain nanoparticles of bamboo charcoal that fight odour and germs, help with circulation, and keep your feet cool and dry. This technology dries the bamboo at 800&deg;C to charcoal, processes it to nanosize, and then adds the particles to the cotton, polyester or nylon fibre. Okay, so what happens when you spill your drink down your shirt? Mess! Not if you've got one of these: a shirt made with Nanotex. This fabric is hydrophobic. (No, it's not scared of water; it just repels it.) When liquid comes into contact with the fabric, it forms a ball or bead and rolls off. Each fibre in the fabric has been transformed using nanotechnology. A sheet of nanosized whiskers stands up perpendicular to the surface of the fibre. The tiny whiskers attract air and repel liquid, creating a cushion of air between the textile surface and the fibre surface. Nanotechnology can be used in all aspects of fabrics and textiles, even when it comes to grazing your knee. Did you know that silver has been used for centuries to prevent and treat infection, and is a powerful antimicrobial agent? Using nanotechnology, silver can now be incorporated into bandages to help heal wounds. These bandages have a rayon/polyester core between two layers of silver-coated high-density polyethylene mesh. Nanocrystalline silver particles act against micro-organisms and infection. Using nanotechnology within the textile industry is providing us with some amazing and innovative products. This tiny technology is certainly here to stay. Top of Page Copyright &copy; 2005-2007 Network Ten Australia &amp; CSIRO Australia Privacy Statement and Legal Notice &amp; Disclaimer 
