 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationManaging contested landscapes is a key sustainability issue.CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems overviewCSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems (CSE) undertakes research and development across a range of landscapes - targeting the challenges of social, economic and environmental sustainability. What we do Collaboration Where we are Other facilities CSE undertakes research to enable: ecosystems that support healthy rural, regional and urban communities landscapes that sustain viable enterprises management that allows biodiversity to prosper. We aim to understand the connections between natural, agricultural, industrial and urban ecosystems as well as economic and social processes.&#160; We also aim to build effective partnerships to improve our understanding of sustainability and the management and policy used to achieve sustainability. What we do Our research programs are: We aim to understand the connections between natural, agricultural, industrial and urban ecosystems as well as economic and social processes. Tropical Landscapes Agricultural Landscapes Rangelands and Savannas Resource Futures Urban Systems. CSE's research expertise is targeted towards four key areas to deliver critical outcomes for achieving on-going sustainability. These are: future cities healthy ecosystems resilient regions and communities sustainable rural livelihoods. CSE provides client services in such disciplines as: production systems modelling natural resource management ecological analysis mine site rehabilitation advice community and regional planning sustainable urban infrastructure and design. Our science addresses&#160;the needs of community, government and industry. Collaboration Promoting innovative partnerships is one of our key goals and CSE works collaboratively with many research institutes nationally and internationally. We are stakeholders in&#160;seven Australian Cooperative Research Centres (CRCs): Construction Innovation CRC Desert Knowledge CRC Plant-based Management of Dryland Salinity CRC Rainforest CRC Sugar CRC Tropical Savannas CRC Weeds CRC. Where we are Our staff are based at the following 11 CSIRO laboratories: Urrbrae Laboratory in Adelaide, South Australia Centre for Arid Zone Research (CAZR) in Alice Springs, Northern Territory Tropical Forests Research Centre (TFRC) in Atherton, Queensland Queensland Bioscience Precinct (QBP) in Brisbane, Queensland Gungahlin Homestead in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory Tropical Ecosystems Research Centre (TERC) in Darwin, Northern Territory Highett Laboratory in Melbourne, Victoria Floreat Laboratory in Perth, Western Australia North Ryde offices in Sydney, New South Wales Davies Laboratory in Townsville, Queensland Agricultural Production Systems Research Unit (APSRU) Offices in Toowoomba, Queensland. We also have staff co-located&#160;with partner research organisations in: Cairns, Queensland with the Tasmanian Institute of Agricultural Research, University of Tasmania in Hobart, Tasmania. Other facilities CSE is also the host Division for the Australian National Wildlife Collection (ANWC), the official Commonwealth collection of Australian land vertebrates covering: birds mammals amphibians reptiles. The ANWC museum is located at the Gungahlin Homestead laboratories in Canberra in the Australian Capital Territory. Discover more about our work at CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems.
Commercial Information Division name: CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems Chief: Dr Andrew Johnson Focus: sustainable management planning and land use within various landscape settings Core capabilities: arid zone sustainability biodiversity climate impacts community planning complex systems ecology farming systems futures modelling resource economics sociology sustainable agricultural production sustainable infrastructure tropical landscape sustainability urban sustainability Laboratories:&#160; located on&#160;11 CSIRO sites across Australia and co-located&#160;within other organisations in Australia and South-East Asia Primary Contact Ms Angela KirkmanMarketing &amp; Communication ManagerCSIRO Sustainable EcosystemsPhone: 61 7 3214 2669 Fax: 61 7 3214 2308 Email: Angela.Kirkman&#64;csiro.au Location CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems - Gungahlin HomesteadBellenden StreetCrace ACT 2911AustraliaGPO Box 284Canberra ACT 2601Australia© Copyright CSIRO 2005 
