 Home About TERC ResearchFire ecology and managementLandscape ecology and managementEcological modellingInvertebrate biodiversity and bioindicatorsSustainable grazing managementIncorporating social values into environment managementCommunity based natural resource managementNatural resource governanceInternational Collaboration ResourcesEducationSeminarsContact Details CSE Home CSIRO Home Research The Tropical Savannas research team in Darwin is part of CSIRO’s Rangelands and Savannas Program, which also has laboratories in Townsville, Brisbane and Alice Springs. The Program belongs to the Division of Sustainable Ecosystems, which has its headquarters in Canberra. We are core participants in the Tropical Savannas Management CRC, and more recently the Bushfire CRC, with most of our work being done in collaboration with other government agencies and research institutions. Our ecological research aims to predict how savanna ecosystems vary in relation to rainfall and soils, and how they respond to land management, especially fire and grazing, but also mining, tree clearing and habitat fragmentation. We are particularly interested in defining ecological health (from a range of perspectives) at local and landscape scales, and in developing appropriate assessment and monitoring methodologies. We are building our socio-economic capacity to address sustainability more broadly, with a particular emphasis on Aboriginal livelihoods. Research Programs &nbsp Fire ecology and management The vast majority of bushfires in Australia occur in the savanna landscapes of the tropical north, where bushfire issues relate primarily to landscape management rather than protection of life and pro... &nbsp Landscape ecology and management There is a pressing need for enhancing our understanding of the ecological impacts of land management options in the face of increasing pressure for economic development in northern Australia. &nbsp Ecological modelling Simulation models allow us to integrate our scientific understanding about how a savanna system works so that the behaviour of this system can be predicted. &nbsp Invertebrate biodiversity and bioindicators The great majority of the world’s species are invertebrates, and invertebrates play key roles in maintaining ecosystem health. &nbsp Sustainable grazing management Extensive pastoralism is a major land use in the tropical savannas. &nbsp Incorporating social values into environment management Northern Australian landscapes provide a wide range of uses and benefits that are valued by people, and this full set of values needs to be incorporated into natural resource management. &nbsp Community based natural resource management Governments are increasingly recognizing that Aboriginal people are themselves best placed to deliver sustainable environmental and livelihood outcomes from 'caring for country' on their land. &nbsp Natural resource governance There is now broad consensus that local participation is a necessary prerequisite to the sustainable management of natural resources, and the NT Government has expressed a desire to involve local comm... &nbsp International Collaboration Our research benefits from collaboration with a wide range of overseas scientists and land managers, and such collaboration helps our work have an impact internationally. This page last updated 26 September, 2006TERC database last updated 21 February, 2007 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2006 
