 CSIRO Sustainability Network What is Sustainable Development? Greater public awareness of environmental issues and their linkage to economic and social factors has generated growing concern for the long-term sustainability of our society, both in Australia and globally. In short: How can we live well today AND live well tomorrow? There are many definitions of sustainable development. The World Commission on Environment and Development has defined it as follows: “Sustainable development is a process of change in which the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the orientation of technical development, and institutional change are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human needs and aspirations.” A similar, but more detailed definition is given in the OECD Policy Brief 2001 – “Sustainable Development: Critical Issues”: “Sustainable development” refers to a development path along which the maximisation of human well-being for today’s generations does not lead to declines in future well-being. Attaining this path requires eliminating those negative externalities that are responsible for natural resource depletion and environmental degradation. It also requires securing those public goods that are essential for economic development to last, such as those provided by well-functioning ecosystems, a healthy environment and a cohesive society. Sustainable development also stresses the importance of retaining the flexibility to respond to future shocks, even when their probability, and the size and location of their effects, cannot be assessed with certainty. Such definitions have sometimes drawn criticism for being too “human centric” – or too complicated to be inspirational. If sustainable development is indeed about living well today while maintaining the ability to live well tomorrow, perhaps the best definition is the one given to us by author, Paul Hawken, in a recent presentation in Australia (Enviro 2002): “Sustainable development means improving the quality of life for all, within the Planet’s capacity to sustain us.” Herein lies the challenge – the challenge of working with the complex interdependencies of environment, industries, people and governments in such a way that the whole socio-enviro-economic system is improved in harmony without detriment to its individual parts. We need to address today’s issues without creating new problems for tomorrow. [Sustainability Network Home] © Copyright 2002, CSIRO Australia Use of this web site and information available from it is subject to our Legal Notice and Disclaimer and Privacy Statement Updated 1st November 2002 
