 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchProgramsTropical Landscapes Tropical Biodiversity Tropical Landscapes Home Integrated Landscape Management Tropical Biodiversity Sustaining Ecosystem Processes Vertebrate Management Sustainable Intensive Production Resilient Agri-Industry Supply Chains Skills &amp; Expertise Program Contacts Tropical Biodiversity Influential planning and management strategies that inform policies and practices for sustaining biodiversity in tropical landscapes both in Australia and overseas. The Issues Current projects The Issues In Australia and around the world tropical forest ecosystems are threatened. These ecosystems are repositories of biodiversity as well as sources of services and wealth for local communities. Sustainable management of these ecosystems remains one of our key natural resource management challenges. Our goal is to conduct research that informs management by: describing the ecological and evolutionary processes that have determined the nature and distribution of biodiversity in Australia&rsquo;s tropical forests; understanding the ecological processes that maintain current ecosystems, their component species and their services; and directly addressing conservation management issues by providing new technologies, specific knowledge and approaches. Current projects Cassowary Ecology and Management &ndash; understanding the diet, movement and seed/weed dispersal, and genetics of the cassowary. Contact: David Westcott Habitat Modelling in the Wet Tropics - predicting and mapping current distributions and predicting distributions in un-sampled areas, of plants, animals and forest types. Contact: David Westcott Survey Design for Tropical Biodiversity &ndash; using a systematic survey strategy to fill gaps in knowledge of the distribution patterns of species. Contact: David Westcott Evolution and Landscape History &ndash; understanding how environment and landscape structure have influenced the evolution of communication systems in rainforest birds. Contact: David Westcott Developing and Testing Biodiversity Surrogates &ndash; understanding how different taxonomic groups can be used as surrogates for biodiversity and how these compare with traditional abiotic or biotic surrogates in conservation planning. Contact: Kristen Williams Conservation Science in Melanesia &ndash; building capacity for conservation planning and the management of biodiversity in New Guinea and the east Melanesian island arc. Contact: Chris Margules Sustaining Ecosystem Processes This page last updated 1 May, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
