 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeNews &amp; InformationFact Sheets News &amp; Information Home Current Issues Fact Sheets Library Services Media Publications Enquiries Links Fact Sheets CSE science - general information about our science CSE research - information about our programs and projects Scientific achievements - including history and highlights All our fact sheets are in PDF format. The Adobe Acrobat reader software is freely available from Adobe. CSE science Ecosystem Services What are ecosystem services? (400 Kb) Markets for ecosystem services (140 Kb) Biodiversity Biograze - The Biograze project is concerned with managing the interactions between grazing and biodiversity. Project reports and fact sheet are available from the Centre for Arid Zone Research website. Bird biodiversity in NSW woodlands (192 Kb) Insects as environmental indicators (36 Kb) Fire and biodiveristy in Northern Australia (36 Kb) Climate Marsupials and climate change (29 Kb) - some of Australia's rarest marsupials have retreated to the tops of our highest wet tropical mountains in order to avoid the fatal consequences of climate change. Sustainable Futures Modelling and Scenarios Future sustainability of the Australian grains industry (152 Kb) - Like many industries around the world, the Australian grains industry is keen to ensure its long-term sustainability. This analysis took a long-term, strategic view of the grains industry within the context of agriculture as a whole, rural landscapes and regional economies. Opportunities for the Australian Outback - researching institutional arrangements in the north (152 kb) - this project aims to develop and understanding of the factors that influence management of land use systems in the Australian outback. What could the future hold - scenario planning for resource management (55 Kb) - CSIRO has developed a new tool to provide some revealing insights into how our current choices will play out in the Australian landscape over the next 50 years. Pest Management Exotic ants (272 kb) Mouse plagues (393 Kb) Rodents in Australia (242 Kb) Rodents in South East Asia (524 Kb) CSE research A snapshot of CSE including about our themes and research program. Download the 12 page brochure (836 Kb). Further details are available from the research Program sections of our Web site. Agricultural Landscapes Tropical Landscapes Rangelands and Savannas Resource Futures Urban Systems Scientific achievements Cane Toad facts (136 Kb) Cane Toad research (156 Kb) Rabbits facts (565 Kb) Rabbits in the Mulga (39 Kb) Ecological Research: history of understanding Australian ecology Rabbit Control: Rabbits as pests in Australia, Myxo and Calicivirus rabbit control programs The Gungahlin Homestead See also: CSE Research CSE Library This page last updated 10 October, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
