 textile news online
Issue 15 – November 2006 www.csiro.au Welcome to Textile and Fibre Technology Important Notice to all readers of Textile News Online from CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology.
Over the past few months we have been redeveloping CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology’s external web presence onto the CSIRO public web site. Now that this task is complete, this web site will close on 24th November 2006. The work of CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology (CTFT) will now feature as part of the CSIRO Public web site. To locate materials specifically within the CSIRO website, please select the following link. (It’s a good idea to bookmark this link for easy future access). http://www.csiro.au/csiro/channel/pch4j,,.html New CTFT web site
Fibre Technology. This CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology ‘launching page’ will provide you with a full range of information on the achievements, capabilities, projects, services, staff and publications from CSIRO Textile and To subscribe to Textile News Online in the future, go to:http://www.csiro.au/csiro/channel/pchn,,.html For more information about the work of CSIRO, go to http://www.csiro.au/ To locate materials specifically on textiles, go to http://www.csiro.au/csiro/channel/ich4l,,.html The following articles in this newsletter are summaries of articles featured on the new web site. Please follow the links at the end of each summary to view the full article. In this issue…..
CSIRO CARBON NANOTUBE RESEARCH TEAM TOPS OFF A HIGH-ACHIEVING YEAR INNOVATION VITAL TO KEEPING WOOL PROFITABLE NEW CAPABILITIES AT CTFT IT’S NOT ROCKET SCIENCE... IT'S ROCKIN' SCIENCE NEW FABRIC FOR PREVENTION OF SKIN TEARS QUICKDRY MERINO: A NEW QUICK DRYING WOOL FABRIC WOOL FILTERS FOR USE IN AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS IN SEARCH OF WHITER, BRIGHTER WOOLLENS EDUCATION AND TRAINING PRODUCTION AND PERFORMANCE OF TEXTILE FIBRES AND FABRICS IN THE SPOTLIGHT 2 3 4 6 7 8 8 9 9 11 12 CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 1 CSIRO Carbon Nanotube Research Team tops off a high-achieving year
A Carbon Nanotubes Research Team from CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology has achieved local and international acclaim over the past year, culminating in the award of a research medal at CSIRO’s annuals awards ceremony. The team’s success in winning an Avantex Innovation Prize in 2005 for its initial work in the development of carbon nanotube yarns has been followed by further recognition in 2006. Carbon nanotube research at CTFT Interest in the potential for carbon nanotubes to create a range of futuristic materials was sparked when their structure was revealed in the early 1990s. Carbon nanotubes are pure carbon and have a diameter of about a millionth of a millimetre, are immensely strong, and are excellent conductors of heat and electricity.
Chris Skourtis with Carbon Nanotubes In 2004, Mr Ken Atkinson of CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology, demonstrated to researchers at the Nanotech Institute (NTI) of the University of Texas at Dallas that carbon nanotubes could be twisted into a yarn in the same way as conventional fibres like wool and cotton. A partnership was formed between the two organisations to further this research. These CNT structures offer a myriad of applications in many sectors, the development of which could transform the competitiveness of existing Australian industries, and dramatically accelerate the growth of fledgling high technology industries, as well as spawn a CNT manufacturing industry. One of the major problems facing commercialisation of the CNT technology is reproducibility of the process for growing drawable CNT forests (high quality carbon nanotube forests that allow CNT fibres to be easily ‘drawn’ into yarns or sheets). Since 2006, Mr Atkinson and Dr Stephen Hawkins, Project Leader at the Clayton site, have been leading their teams at Belmont and Clayton to develop an industrially robust procedure for growing the CNT forests with the special property of “drawability”, previously only achieved at NTI. Secondly, to scale-up production including the design and manufacture of multihead spinning capacity; and thirdly, to manufacture CNT fabrics, knitted and woven, and CNT sheets for applications research. Achievements to date: 2005 AVANTEX Award Mr Ken Atkinson jointly with Professor Ray Baughman and Dr Mei Zhang (NanoTech Institute, University of Texas at Dallas) won the 2005 AVANTEX Innovation Award for their breakthrough discovery of how pure carbon nanotubes can be spun into yarns. 2006 NanoVic Award for innovation in nanotechnology In June 2006, Mr Atkinson and his team from CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology, working with the NanoTech Institute, UTD, for CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 2 carbon nanotube yarns won a Nanovic Prize for Innovation in Nanotechnology from Nanotechnology Victoria. The NanoVic Prizes are offered annually to the best entrants in the fields of industrial, postgraduate, and undergraduate nanotechnology development for commercial use. Nanotech Briefs ® Nano 50™ Award Shortly afterwards, the UTD /CSIRO combined team won the Technology Category at the second annual Nanotech Briefs ® Nano 50™ Awards, presented by Nanotech Briefs Magazine. (Nanotech Briefs is a digital monthly magazine from the publishers of NASA Tech Briefs). Researcher of the Year, Geelong Carbon Nanotubes Team Leader, Mr Atkinson, was nominated in August in the Smart Geelong Network’s Researcher of the Year Awards in the Innovation Category. He won this award as well as the overall Researcher of the Year Award. CSIRO Research Medal To complete the team’s success in 2006, CSIRO has recognized the local and international impact of the work of the Carbon Nanotubes team by awarding them with a CSIRO Research medal. Media release: http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps1y8,,.html View our video clip of Spinning carbon nanotubes. http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/file/pf55,,.html Innovation vital to keeping wool profitable
Dr Nigel Johnson
CSIRO wool textile research drives the application of science to help woolgrowers and wool processors survive in a fast-moving world. Background Consumers today expect even low cost apparel to have high performance and functionality, such as: • softness • next-to-skin comfort • breathability • durability. They demand: • vivid colours • bright whites or pastel shades
Nigel Johnson discussing fibre properties with Lucy Vuckovic • striking prints on any fabric. Wool used to set the upper level of consumer expectation, but nowadays it is wool’s competitors that have ‘raised the bar.’ Wool industry benefits from research Dr Nigel Johnson, Chief of CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology, says CSIRO has been at the forefront of wool textile research for over 50 years, helping wool compete with the ever-improving synthetics. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 3 It has been responsible for developing better measurement and specification of fibre properties, permanent press for wool garments, Sirospun™ and Solospun™ for lighter weight fabrics, Sportwool™ for moisture management of active sportswear and Optim™ for finer, softer luxurious garments. 'Without this steady flow of innovations, enabled by science, Australian wool would not still command three to four times the price of polyester, acrylic and cotton,' Dr Johnson says. CSIRO’s wool textile activities focus on demand creation, minimising costs and addressing the global challenges faced by wool. To read more about CSIRO’s innovations in wool and how we are addressing these challenges, go to the full article published in the November issue of Farming Ahead magazine http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/file/pfme,,.html New capabilities at CTFT
Advanced fibrous materials: lighter, stronger, smarter
At CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology, we are focusing on the use of bio-, nano- and electro-active materials in fibrous structures to create high-value products. Creating new material New advanced, hybrid, and composite materials are created through analysing the structure, properties or behaviours of natural and humanmade materials. These materials can be used to develop new components for existing or entirely new consumer goods for industries such as: • • • • • construction aerospace packaging automotive military.
Knitted microtube CTFT’s Advanced fibrous materials capability We are developing new advanced, composite and hybrid materials based on natural or synthetic fibres. Our advanced fibrous materials capability now includes: • • • • • • • the production of nanofibres by electrospinning carbon nanotube (CNT) yarn and sheet manufacture bicomponent fibre extrusion the formation and characterization of structures manufactured from extruded fibres application of conducting polymers to textiles integration of electronic functions into textiles small sample circular knitting, weaving and nonwovens carding and needlepunching machines. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 4 Our focus Our focus is on the use of nano-, bio- and electro-active materials in fibrous structures to create high-value products. Find out more about our: • • Advanced fibrous materials projects Our new equipment for preparing samples of advanced composite materials - CCI small sample weaving loom from CCI Tech Inc. Taiwan - Harry Lucas R-1s miniature circular knitting machine • Our other resources and facilities at CTFT. http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps2d1,,.html Instrumentation and Machine prototyping
Did you know that CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology has an Instrumentation and machine prototyping team who work on research projects and a range of industry needs? Our team applies electronics, physics, engineering, mechatronics, robotics, optics and software engineering to develop instruments and machinery.
Stuart Lucas with Cottonscan What we do We design new instruments through a team approach by project leaders and workshop staff and our workshop has developed a rapid prototyping system of practice for designing instruments and machinery, so that we can efficiently and quickly develop and modify our prototypes. Some Instruments developed by CSIRO • Dark and Medullated Fibre detection device • Siroclear™ detects and removes foreign fibres in yarn • Cottonscan Instrument measures fibre fineness. • Webscanner instrument measures and maintains the uniformity of nonwovens. • Laserscan™ use lasers to measure the average fibre diameter and distribution of wool. • Fleecescan™ is a portable instrument for on-farm fleece testing to assist in the classing of fibre. • FMT instrument was manufactured to design specifications from Cotton Inc. in the US to resolve the reliability of their cotton maturity testing device. • Siromat software and optics accurately measures cotton fibre maturity. • Carbon nanotube spinning (CNT) machine spins carbon nanotube yarns from spinnable CNT forests onto bobbins. Consultancies to Technical Textiles companies
We also build instruments for industry requirements. For example, we built a device for the nonwovens industry that monitors the quality of nonwoven webs. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 5 For another industry partner, we developed sound modeling software to analyse how much different materials absorb sound. Find out more about our Instrument and machine prototyping team http://www1.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps2ec,,.html Prototype engineering workshop
Working closely with our Instrument and Machine Prototyping team is the Prototype Engineering Workshop, who uses their combined expertise in fine toolmaking, machining, precision finishing of products and in hardening and grinding to develop prototype instruments. What we do We have developed a rapid prototyping system of practice for designing instruments and machinery, through a consultation process between our mechanical design technicians and Instrument and Machine prototyping team. Our design team then works in the labs to build their prototype machines. Practical input into the design comes from all members of our workshop team as we progressively modify the prototype. Once we are satisfied with the design and operation, we prepare detailed drawings for the CNC mill. This method has greatly speeded up the production of instrumentation at the CSIRO Textile & Fibre Technology division. The Hartford Computer Numeric Control (CNC) mill Our experienced and skilled mechanical design technicians use Solidworks a solid modeling Computer Assisted Design (CAD)package - to model the various parts prior to manufacturing. These modeled parts are then translated into a package called SolidCAM. The CNC enables us to make complex-shaped objects that we previously couldn’t cut by hand, or which in the past would have been labour intensive to manually program. Once designers are satisfied with the mill output, it can automatically repeat the process any number of times with minimal supervision. Our experience with toolmaking and fine machining enables us to customize tooling and manual programming to suit the most complex needs. Our Prototype Engineering workshop works closely with the Instrumentation team. Find out more on http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps2bq,,.html It’s not rocket science... it's rockin' science
CSIRO has built a virtual guitar to showcase its expertise in designing and manufacturing electronic and intelligent textiles with which people effortlessly control computers. In a demonstration project intended to put their electronic textile engineering skills on the line, a team led by Research Engineer Dr Richard Helmer created an objectless musical instrument, or Wearable Instrument Shirt (WIS). 'Freedom of movement is a great feature of these textile-based interfaces,' he says. 'Our air guitar consists of a wearable sensor interface embedded in a conventional 'shirt', with custom software to map gestures with audio samples. It’s an easy-to- CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 6 use, virtual instrument that allows real-time music making, even by players without significant musical or computing skills. It allows you to jump around and the sound generated is just like an original mp3.' View a video clip of the Wearable Instrument Shirt in action and Listen to Dr Richard Helmer describe how it works. Dr Helmer also explains the potential uses for this technology http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps29y,,.html The air guitar story has generated considerable press coverage around the world, after the video was featured on Youtube, where it was viewed over 11,000 times in the first few days. View the “Wanna be rocker’s dream come true” on Youtube : http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uwvKGJXvHZA New fabric for prevention of skin tears
CSIRO has developed a garment that will prevent skin tears in the elderly while providing the highest levels of comfort and patient tolerance. Skin tear prevention is a rapidly emerging area of priority for the aged care industry worldwide. Approximately 15 per cent of people in high-care nursing homes have a 'skin tear' at any one time, according to a study by Mr Geoff Sussman,
Woollen sleeve that prevents skin tears Director of Wound Education and Research Group at the Victorian College of Pharmacy. In response to the Sussman report, Mr Robin Cranston at CSIRO assembled a research team to develop a garment that will prevent skin tears in the elderly while providing the highest levels of comfort and patient tolerance. After considerable research, garments have been produced that performed very well in wear trials conducted at nursing homes. The garments were worn exclusively by residents with a history of skin tears. However no irritation, itchiness or discomfort occurred. No odour was produced, even though garments were worn for almost 24 hours per day on an ongoing basis, only being removed when the resident was bathed. No skin tears occurred during the trial. These garments will undergo clinical trials to confirm their quality and usability. Read more about the garment design criteria, the prototype design, the wearer trials in nursing homes and the results of those trials. http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps28m,,.html CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 7 QuickDry Merino: a new quick drying wool fabric
Wool garments have a reputation for being comparatively slow drying, causing them to lose ground in the marketplace against their synthetic competitors. Wool garments can be made quick-dry and a partnership between Australian wool Innovation Ltd and CSIRO has achieved this with its QuickDry Merino technology. What CSIRO did A CSIRO research team, funded by Australian Wool Innovation Ltd, tackled this problem by investigating treatments for reducing the amount of water held after washing. They produced a high performance ‘quick-dry’ finish for wool, to allow it to compete with the quick-dry performance of synthetics and cotton in active sportwear markets. The QuickDry Merino (QDM) technology is currently being taken up by European, Australian and American manufacturers and retailers. QuickDry Merino is ideal for the hand wash and machine washable wool knitwear market. Treated garments dry in approximately one third the time required for untreated garments. Download an information sheet on QuickDry Merino from Australian Wool Innovation Ltd at http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/file/pfn2,,.html Full story at http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps28n,,.html
New quick drying wool fabric Wool filters for use in air-conditioning systems
CSIRO has developed an electrostatically charged wool filter medium which consumes little energy, is highly efficient and makes breathing easier. The damage, which particles from pollutants in the air can inflict on the human respiratory system, depends among other factors on their dwell time in the lungs. Mechanical filters find extensive application in various areas of personal protection, most notably in industry where workers may be exposed to very fine dust or pollutants. Recently, electrostatic filters have entered this area of air filtration due to their superior efficiency over mechanical filters and their low resistance to airflow, which allows users to breathe more easily through the filter. How CSIRO has helped The technology has been transferred to an Australian manufacturer who has produced filter media on commercial scale equipment and, based on independent tests, have shown that the
Electrostatic wool fibre media outperforms a range of commercially available competitive products. The company will be launching products based on this material into the global market. This will CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 8 create a new market and therefore contribute to increasing the demand for Australian wool. This work was funded by Australian Wool Innovation Ltd. Read more at: http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps28o,,.html In search of whiter, brighter woollens
Improved wool whitening technology could solve problems caused by yellowing, allowing wool blend fabrics to be whitened without subsequent colour degradation. The inherent cream colour of wool precludes its use for classic bright white garments such as: • • • • corporate wear hosiery active sportswear baby wear. Cotton and synthetics dominate these markets. Find out how CSIRO has developed a new bleaching process (ColorClear™ WB) to produce wool fabrics with a comparable whiteness to cotton and synthetics to lift the competitiveness of wool and wool polyester blends http://www1.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps26s,,.html
Whiter wool blends Now available on the web site is the ColorClear™ WB 10-page technical information bulletin, titled: Superwhite Australian merino using ColorClear™ WB bleaching technology report at http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/file/pfle,,.html CSIRO partners with Australian Wool Innovation Ltd (AWI) in this project. Education and Training
We offer a range of education, training and technology transfer services in fibre and textile processing through seminars and interactive training activities. For example, we help your middle and senior managers to better understand the critical technical factors that affect their commercial decisions, and we train operational staff to understand how textile processing machines work. Our courses are tailored precisely to provide the level and content you require. We have operated a number of training courses in 2006. Here are some current and recent courses: CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 9 Cotton Field to Fabric Training Course 28th to 30th November This training course is designed to give participants an overview of the entire cotton pipeline from farm to predicting fabric performance. This three day course is designed for people who are involved in any part of the cotton industry, from growers to technologists. It aims to give a better understanding of how segments of the industry operate and how each relates to one another. For program and registration details, download the Cotton Field to Fabric brochure containing program outline and registration details from the website at . http://www1.csiro.au/csiro/content/file/pfga,,.html Media release: http://www.csiro.au/csiro/content/standard/ps27p,,.html The course has limited places due to the hands-on nature of proceedings. Applications close when all places are filled. Sport Science and Technology workshop at the Australian Institute of Sport
CSIRO scientists were expected to eat, sleep and perform like super athletes during a Sports Science and Technology workshop held at the Australian Institute of Sport (AIS), Canberra, on 2 – 3 November. Two AIS boxers gave a display of their art while showcasing the automatic boxing scoring system. The experience was aimed at ensuring CSIRO participants were in the right frame of mind to engage with AIS experts as part of the new CSIRO/AIS Sports Science and Technology Network (SSTN). Organised by CTFT in conjunction with the AIS, the workshop was attended by 16 CSIRO scientists from 10 divisions, over 40 AIS scientists and technologists and 3 Defence Science and Technology Organisation (DSTO) participants. The aim of the workshop was to foster collaboration on the development of sports science and technologies which can help Australia’s elite athletes to maintain Australia’s reputation as one of the world’s leading sports nations. Dr Nigel Johnson (CTFT) opened the workshop and Dr Geoff Garrett, CSIRO, AIS Director, Peter Fricker and Mark Peters the CEO of the Australian Sports Commission also made short presentations. Head of Applied Research Centre, AIS, Prof Allan Hahn , spoke on the AIS Research and Development program, while speakers from a broad range of scientific disciplines including psychology, physiology, nutrition, and biomechanics talked about their sports field and their R&D “wish list”. Dr Johnson then introduced speakers from across CSIRO representing a diverse array of scientific fields with possible applications in sport. A tour of the AIS, showcased the physiology and biomechanics departments as well as the new AIS swimming pool. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 10 Day 2 featured brainstorming sessions in which CSIRO and AIS scientists engaged each other with ideas for possible projects and collaborations. The workshop was very successful, exceeding the expectations of all involved. Many valuable relationships were developed between CSIRO and AIS scientists, as well as between CSIRO scientists from different divisions. Production and performance of textile fibres and fabrics
CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology will be running a basic two-day training course in fibre and fabric performance for textile marketers and buyers working in the industry. Dates are : December 11 – 12. This course provides a basic understanding of:
• • • • • • • • • • • • • Fibre types and properties Processing of fibres Blends and their benefits Yarn construction Weaving, knitting and Nonwovens Dyeing and finishing of fabrics and fibre types Yarn dyeing, fabric dyeing and garment dyeing Finishing of fabrics for special effects Quality assurance and control Textile testing Labelling requirements Understanding fabric specifications Fabric performance requirements
Silver coated copper wire weave. The training program takes a hands-on approach, with tours and activities in the textile mill, testing laboratory, dyeing and finishing and nonwovens mill. For information on courses for textile marketers and buyers contact Mr Dale Carroll on 03 52464755 Australian Wool Textile Training Program
The first series of seven short courses in wool technology were held at CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology at Belmont, Victoria during September and early October 2006. The Australian Wool Textiles Training Centre (AWTTC) Program is an initiative for wool-industry training in Australia and is designed to advance knowledge and skills in processing Australian wool. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 11 The AWTTC Program enables participants to select individual courses according to each participant's skills and interests along the wool processing pipeline. Included in the program were: • Introduction to the Australian Wool Industry • Wool Buying and Consignment Specification • Advanced Quality Management Systems • Contemporary Wool Dyeing and Finishing • Advanced Innovations in Wool Textile Technology • Modern Mill Management Practices • Australian Wool – Knowledge for Retailers and Designers. All course participants received a certificate documenting courses completed and skills acquired. Each course is in high demand and places are limited. Further courses will operate in 2007. More information on these courses is available at www.AWTTC.com.au. In the Spotlight Sean Hutton Sean Hutton recently joined CSIRO Textile & Fibre Technology as a Research Scientist working in the area of Carbon Nanotube Yarn under the direction of Dr Niall Finn. Sean has a masters degree from Monash University Clayton campus on theoretical aspects of quantum optics and a Ph.D in the physics of Granular materials. For the last 4 years Sean worked as a Post Doc at the Norwegian Centre of Excellence, based at the University of Oslo where he was involved with experiments into the formation of vents in sedimentary basins. Sean has so far been involved with work on advanced textile technologies and computer modelling of non-woven structures. CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology 12 
