 Eureka Too
Eureka Too is a 70 minute session. There are 30 activities including Ball Race, Can Rollers, Guitar String, Around the Loop, Build a Bridge, Mystery Room, There’s Hole in the Hand, Pick up Points, Rotating Platform, Touch and Feel, Size and Distance and more. This session is run by the class teacher accompanying the class with an introduction and final engaging demonstrations run by our staff. Newton’s Cage Apparatus Balance Pole Touch and Feel Put all the balls in the middle Can you balance 9 rods on of the cage. Roll one ball top of the metal 'T'? back and fire it at the others. Repeat this with more balls. What happens? Put your fingers into each of the openings. Feel the object inside. Name each of the objects. Pick Up Points Polaroid Patterns Rotating Platform Pick up each cone by the point without using your fingernails! Use the polarising glasses to look at all the objects on the light box. Rotate the objects. What happens? Wobbly Pendulum Turn on the moving turntable and roll the 3 different balls across it. What happens to the motion of the balls? Hidden Force Size and Distance Look in the hole. Move the Set the pendulum moving. knob until both black discs are Why does it move in this the same distance from your unlikely manner? eye. Now look through the side of the box. Roll the ball down from the yellow slot. Why doesn’t it travel as you might expect? Ball Race Can Rollers Guitar String Arrange all the tracks and fittings into a continuous pathway. Start the ball at the top. How long does it take for the ball to reach the bottom? Around the Loop Release the cans from one Pluck the guitar string. Make the string shorter side. Do all the cans roll the same? Which can rolls by pressing down on the string. What happens to the longest? the sound? Can you play a tune? Build a Bridge Hole in the Hand Roll each of the balls in turn from the coloured release positions. Does each ball make it around the loop from each height? Using the 5 pieces can you Look through the make an arch bridge with eyepiece. What can you out any help? Is it easier see? Now put your with two people? hand in the way. Can you explain what happens? Mystery Room Thread the Needle Newton’s Cradle Look in the hole at the front. Turn on the switch. What do you see? Are the men the same size? Hold the rod. Cover an eye. Try to push the rod in through the hole in the aluminium bar. Now try the wire and needle. Pull one ball back and let it drop onto the others. What happens? Repeat with two. Now drop one from each end and then two from one end and one from the other. 3 D Shapes Gravity Well Reverse Mask Using the special glasses look at the magazine. What do you notice about the pictures? Why are the glasses two colours? What do the pictures look like without the glasses? • Roll the different balls around the edge of the well. Which ball rolls the longest? Look at the masks on the wall while you walk across the room. What is unusual about one of the masks? This summary of the instructions appearing with each activity may help you to relate the name of the activity to what was done when you are back at school. • • • • The activities are multisensory, group activities. There are works-sheets if required and instructions are kept to a minimum. Teachers will be provided with pre-visit and post-visit activities. CSIRO Education supports the Essential Learnings implementation. Contact us to discuss your ELs strategies. • CSIRO Education, Tasmania is a joint initiative of CSIRO and the Tasmanian Department of Education. 
