 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeLibrary Services Policies &amp; Services Access Conditions Library Services Home CSIRO Library Catalogue Other Library Catalogues Databases CSIRO Electronic Journal Collection (Login Required) CSIRO Staff Publications Request an Interlibrary Loan (Login Required) Request purchase of Library materials (Staff Only) Notify Library of new CSE Publication (CSE Staff Only) Reference Tools Guides and Help Interesting Sites Contact Us Feedback Policies and Services Access Conditions Who can access a CSE library? All CSE staff CSIRO staff CSIRO Fellows CRC staff working with CSE PhDs and students working with CSE on projects Visiting scientists (short &amp; long term*) University lecturers/researchers/academic staff Individuals/organisations working with CSIRO on specific projects General public (by appointment) Note: Darwin, Atherton, Alice Springs all non-CSIRO visitors by appointment only (*short term = 1 month ; *long term 1 month) What library services are available? The types and levels of services available vary depending on the particular client group. Browsing the collection Borrowing rights Electronic Journals Databases Interlibrary Loans/ Document delivery Photocopying Reference Services Browsing the collection All categories of clients are welcome to browse the library collection. Only CSIRO staff and authorised users are permitted to have access to the Library without a Library staff member present. This is to ensure the security of the collection and that a library staff member is available to help with their request. Borrowing rights CSIRO staff and authorised users are permitted to borrow materials from the Library and must complete the borrowing process (either fill-out the borrowing cards or have the book checked out on the automated circulation system) in order to take items from a CSE Library. Other users who can obtain borrowing rights include those with paid Membership (Gungahlin Library only) ; lecturers/researchers from a University with whom the CSE Library has a reciprocal borrowing arrangement ; or groups on-site who have paid a negotiated fee for Library Services. Electronic Journals The CSIRO Library Network is moving to provide electronic access to journals throughout CSIRO. In some cases, the electronic journal is replacing the print edition. Where possible, and in compliance with the publisher/vendor's license agreements, access to electronic journals (where print is not available) can be provided to all categories of Library users via a designated &quot;walk-in&quot; computer terminal. Supervision of users other than CSIRO and authorised users, is essential. Databases The CSIRO Library Network has a range of databases networked for the use of CSIRO staff and authorised users. To a large degree, the license agreements of these products dictate who can and can't access the various databases. In order to comply with the license restrictions, users must either be employed by CSIRO or have a CSIRO payident, to access the range of networked databases. Interlibrary Loans/Document Delivery Providing interlibrary loans of material not held in the Library's physical collection is a service offered to our primary clients - ie. CSIRO staff. Some fee arrangements with CRCs or other groups may incorporate the use of document delivery but this must be specified in the agreement. Requests for document delivery by Fellows, visiting scientists and PhD students working with CSE on specific projects is determined on a case-by-case basis by the Library staff member responsible for document delivery. PhD students are encouraged to use their University Library first before submitting large numbers of interlibrary loan requests to the CSE Library Services. More information is available about Interlibrary Loans/Document Delivery. Photocopying There are photocopiers located in each of the CSE Libraries and each Library has a slightly different payment system. Some Libraries require a photocopy card that users swipe through a reader that records the number of copies and is processed by Finance against a designated PNO. Other Libraries have an honesty system of cash payment. Non-CSIRO users (or CSIRO users copying for personal use) should pay photocopying costs (per page) direct to the Library staff present. Reference Services Assistance with reference queries is available to all clients, with more in-depth reference services available to primary clients. An Information Broker model has been established to provide tailored reference services to CSE research programs. For more information please contact your local library. Authorised users include CRC (with payidents) or where a payment for library services has been paid Fellows - specified time limit PhDs - with payidents Visiting scientists - long term Please contact the specific CSE Library for local access queries or for queries relating to the access policy for CSE Library Services please contact: Library Services Manager CSIRO Sustainable Ecosytems GPO Box 284 CANBERRA ACT 2601 Phone: (02) 6242 1659 Email: CSE-Library@csiro.au This page last updated 5 August, 2004 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2002 
