 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchRainforest Research Research Home Future Cities Healthy Ecosystems Resilient Regions &amp; Communities Sustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Programs Rainforest Research Current Research Related Links Browse Research Capabilities: Select Topic Area ... Biodiversity Climate Research Ecosystem Services Farming Systems Futures Modelling Landscape Ecology Natural Resource Management Outback Sustainability Pest Management Rainforests Sustainable Agriculture Tropical Savannas Urban Ecosystems Water Rainforests can be defined as forests growing in areas with heavy rainfall. Rainforests are characterized by dense plant growth, rich soil and abundant wildlife. Tropical rainforests are found in warmer areas while temperate rainforests are found in cooler areas. Rainforests are extremely rich in biodiversity. CSE's rainforest research focusses on the tropical rainforests located in the northern parts of Australia based at the CSIRO Tropical Forest Research Centre. CSE takes a unique approach to rainforest research as we look at the social and economic aspects of tropical rainforests as well as rainforest ecology. We seek to find a balance between the conservation of tropical rainforests and the effects of human activity in surrounding areas. Our rainforest research activities include: investigating seed dispersal in the wet tropics. understanding the growth and the dynamics of rainforest trees. climate forecasting and and looking at the effects of climate change on rainforests. developing conservation techniques and population monitoring procedures for rainforest animals. Read about an example of CSE's rainforest research in the following article: Rainforest more or less? - this article considers how tropical forests might shape up in a warmer world. ECOS 111, April-June 2002 (572 Kb) Current Research Sustainable Tropical Ecosystem Processes - this area of research is investigating the effects of climate change on forests, the re-growth and ecology of secondary rainforests and the effect of weeds on rainforest ecosytems. Tropical Biodiversity - CSE researchers are developing priorities for regional biodiversity conservation, mechanisms of seed dispersal in rainforests and the ecology of tropical vertabrate species. TFRC Research - (TFRC Web site) activities relating to many aspects of wet tropical ecosystem science under undertaken at the TFRC including activities from several other CSIRO divisions. Spectacled Flying Fox: Solutions for Management - (TFRC Web site) research in north Queensland aims to understand the flying fox ecology to enable better management. Related Links CSIRO Tropical Forest Research Centre Rainforest CRC World Rainforest Information Centre CSE Research This page last updated 13 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
