 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchSustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Home Future Cities Healthy Ecosystems Resilient Regions &amp; Communities Sustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Programs Sustainable Rural Livelihoods CSE aims to develop prosperous and sustainable rural livelihoods and enterprises driven by innovative management, in tune with the Australian environment, and adapted to global change. In partnership with landholders, we analyse farming systems to improve agricultural mangement. A key challenge is the need to balance production and conservation goals to ensure continuing viability. Current activities Research in action Current activities Research effort is focused on: Globally adaptive rural enterprises Sustainable Agricultural Systems, and Resilient Agri-industry supply chains Research examples: Farming systems - This area focuses on farming systems that extend from traditional grain-grazing systems through to new commodities and enterprises. Sustainable intensive production - These projects focus best practice management of water and nutrient resources and appropriate diversification of farming enterprises and land use practices in tropical landscapes. Rodent research in Asia - The Rodent Research Team develop ecologically-based methods for integrated management of rodent pests in Asia with current activities in Vietnam, Laos and China. FARMSCAPE - This unique approach to farming systems research that combines both practical and scientific agricultural knowledge to create decision tools for farmers. Native Foods - CSIRO is working in conjunction with Aboriginal communities and Australian industry to learn more about &lsquo;bush tucker&rsquo; and put Australian native foods on the menu. Research in action: past projects, achievements and articles Agriculture: adapting to climate change pdf file (87 kb) Nick Goldie and Monica Van Wensveen describe how Australian farmers can lessen the imapct of climate change by developing more 'resilient' agricultural systems. ECOS 115, April-June 2003 New grazing approach is vital for sustainability pdf file (359 kb) CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems scientists explain the role of property management planning and how producers can manage soils and pastures to prevent erosion and maintain production and biodiversity. Farming Ahead 120, December 2001 Maintaining trees enhances grazing potential pdf file (299 kb) CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems scientists explain the benefits of maintaining trees, wildlife habitats and watercourses on farms. Farming Ahead 121, January 2002 New decision tool manages mouse plagues pdf file (365 kb) CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems scientist discusses the development of a new computer software package to help farmers better control mice and predict potential mice plagues. Farming Ahead 125, May 2002 Rat Cunning pdf file (778 kb) Steven Davidson joins the hunt for better ways to manage resourceful rat populations. ECOS 103, April-June 2000 Agricultural Landscapes Program Rangelands and Savannas Tropical Landscapes This page last updated 13 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
