 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationComputer simulation of pollution plume originating in Melbourne and flowing over Bass Strait.Accurate and easy-to-use air pollution modelThe Air Pollution Model (TAPM), a user-friendly model for the prediction of air quality, has a strong scientific basis, verified performance, and can be purchased directly through CSIRO. TAPM features Model outputs CSIRO offers sophisticated air-quality modelling to allow realistic assessments of pollutant dispersal and environmental impact. CSIRO has developed a software package, known as The Air Pollution Model (TAPM), to assess the spread and impact of air pollution. TAPM can help environmental agencies and air pollution consultants assess air quality in urban and regional areas. The model&#160;is a versatile tool that can be applied to any location in the world because it predicts all of the required local meteorology, using global terrain and land-use data as well as global synoptic analyses. TAPM is a user-friendly, PC-based, prognostic meteorological and air pollution model. It is used under licence by more than 130 national and international organisations in 18 countries. TAPM is Australia&#8217;s leading air quality model which is used under licence by more than 130 national and international organisations in 18 countries. The versatile computer model assesses the likely pathway that pollutants will take as they disperse through the atmosphere. The model incorporates the latest advances in air pollution science, gained through theoretical studies, laboratory experiments and field measurements. The model can be used to predict meteorological and air pollution parameters on inter-regional, city, or local scales, for simulation periods from a day to a year or more. The Air Pollution Model (TAPM) has been used for: assessing emissions from individual chimneys investigating photochemical smog in cities studying haze overseas tracking emissions from cities over hundreds of kilometres. The model can be applied to coastal and mountainous areas, which have presented great difficulties for environmental researchers in the past. TAPM features The Air Pollution Model features: attractive graphical user interface predictions of winds, temperature, pressure, water vapour, cloud and rain water as well as many other meteorological parameters tracer mode, dust mode (PM2.5, PM10, PM20, PM30) or multiple pollutant mode (PM2.5, PM10, NOX, NO2, O3, SO2) incorporation of plume rise, building wake effects, photochemistry, aqueous chemistry, and wet and dry deposition. Model outputs TAPM can provide output in a variety of formats: prediction of hourly meteorology and air pollution concentrations various options for visualisation easy extraction of time-series (including common meteorological file formats required by regulatory air pollution models) production of static one-dimensional and two-dimensional plots and summary statistics using common packages. Copies of TAPM software and synoptic analyses for various regions can be purchased through CSIRO. More information including&#160;technical descriptions and a pricelist&#160;is available. Fast facts CSIRO has developed a software package called The Air Pollution Model (TAPM) to estimate the spread and impact of air pollution&#160; TAPM is a meteorological, prognostic air pollution model It is used&#160;by more than 130 national and international organisations in 18 countries&#160; It can provide simulations from a day, to a year or more Primary Contact Dr Simon TorokCommunication and Marketing ManagerCSIRO Marine &amp; Atmospheric ResearchPhone: 61 3 9239 4645 Fax: 61 3 9239 4444 Email: Simon.Torok&#64;csiro.auLocation Marine &amp; Atmospheric Research - Aspendale107 - 121 Station StreetAspendale VIC 3195AustraliaPrivate Bag 1Aspendale VIC 3195Australia © Copyright CSIRO 2006 
