 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchClimate Research Research Home Future Cities Healthy Ecosystems Resilient Regions &amp; Communities Sustainable Rural Livelihoods Research Programs Climate Research Current Research Related Links Browse Research Capabilities: Select Topic Area ... Biodiversity Climate Research Ecosystem Services Farming Systems Futures Modeling Landscape Ecology Natural Resource Management Outback Sustainability Pest Management Rainforests Sustainable Agriculture Tropical Savannas Urban Ecosystems Water Due to both natural processes and human activity it is predicted that temperatures around the world will become warmer with some increases already measured. By 2030 CSIRO's climate change projections suggest temperatures may rise up to 2&deg;C above average*. CSE's climate research is focused on the potential impacts a changing climate may have on agriculture, ecosystems and landscapes. Through the use of modelling and simulations CSE is identifying cost-effective and practical ways of reducing greenhouse emissions from agriculture. Our researchers are also looking for ways to adapt areas of land management to enable farmers and industry to take advantage of opportunities a changing climate may bring, on the time frame of inter-annual change (from phenomena such as El-nino) as well as from longer term changes. The use of modelling has also proved effective in identifying ecosystems and areas which area sensitive to climate change such as Australia's tropical forests. *From CSIRO climate change projections for Australia, 2001 (900 Kb) Further information is available in the following articles: Agriculture: adapting to climate change - CSE research suggests that there may be ways agriculture can adapt and benefit from climate change. ECOS 115, April-June 2003 (87 Kb) Rainforest more or less? - this article considers how tropical forests might shape up in a warmer world. ECOS 111, April-June 2002 (572 Kb) Current Research Sustainable intensive production - this team examines sustainable approaches to agriculture in topical landscapes and use climate forecasting to improve risk management for planning for crop systems. Landscape ecology and modelling - this team located at the CSIRO Tropical Research Centre are working with the Rainforest CRC on the impacts of climate change on rainforests. Related Links Agricultural Production Systems Research Unit (APSRU) Australian Greenhouse Office Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre CSIRO Atmospheric Research CSIRO Marine Research Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Rainforest CRC CSE Research This page last updated 11 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
