  Media Release - Ref 2000/36 - Feb 08 , 2000 CSIRO: $86 M for textile, clothing, footwear research CSIRO has committed $86 million over the next 3 years to textile, clothing and footwear research, Deputy Chief Executive Dr Chris Mallett said today. "Over $60M of this work is for on-and-post-farm wool R&D, making CSIRO currently the largest investor in this sector in the world. "This future commitment reflects our decision to maintain our co-investment in wool research and development over the past decade despite a cumulative reduction, over the same period, of more than $ 90M in income from the levy body," he says. "CSIRO has been proud to be an innovation partner of the wool industry for over 70 years, and has successfully introduced a number of important technologies. The industry is now debating its future levy arrangements, and CSIRO has no role to play in what is an issue for woolgrowers alone. "There has, however, been some debate in the media about CSIRO's role in funding research, development and technology transfer for the wool industry. Our position is best described in a submission to the Wool Industry Future Directions Task Force by CSIRO's Chief Executive, Dr Malcolm McIntosh : "Over many years, CSIRO has relied on the industry to contribute to the cost of research done for its benefit. In more recent times, CSIRO has also had an obligation to earn at least 30% of its total income outside its annual appropriation from the Government. For the wool (and related) industry, this has increasingly come in the form of payment of marginal costs with CSIRO making up the full cost from appropriation. Should the industry funding be withdrawn, the first effect would be an immediate commensurate reduction in the amount of research done. The second effect would be a further reduction as work on land use, plants and other related activities became more general in their focus rather than specific to wool. The third reduction would come from our priority reviews, where it would be very difficult to justify continuing to put appropriation money into supporting an industry, which was not prepared to contribute to its own support. Other industries, that are so prepared would clearly justify priority. This is not to say that wool research would drop to zero, but it would inevitably reduce substantially". Dr Mallett says that whatever the outcome of the Woolpoll, CSIRO will be privileged to work with the levy body, or individual woolgrowers, to enhance and sustain the competitiveness of wool as a fibre. More informationDr Chris Mallett 02 9490 8250Mr John Baistow 02 9490 8253   Contacts Ms Wendy Parsons    Senior Communicator   CSIRO National Awareness PO Box 225 Dickson ACT 2602 Australia Phone: +61 2 6276 6615 Fax: +61 2 6276 6821 Mobile: +61 0419 208194 Email: Wendy.Parsons@nap.csiro.au       
