 Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter. Cotton CRC Annual Science Review, June 17/18.
The review was held in Toowoomba and brought together most CRC researchers and Postgrad students. Half the students had an opportunity to make presentations while the remainder of the program was allocated to presentations against 5 themes, each introduced by a challenge. The themes were IPM, Extension and Education, Water, Farming Systems and Northern Australia. Speakers for each theme were evenly divided between CRC funded and in-kind researchers. This ensured an opportunity for in-kind scientists to showcase their projects and how they relate to the CRC. Award for Innovation: Martin Dillon (CSIRO Entomology) and Ziaul Hoque (NSW Agriculture) for development of the BDI (Beneficial Disruption Index). Award for Collaboration: The WeedPAK team: Stephen Johnson (UNE), Graham Charles (NSW Agriculture), Ian Taylor (NSW Agriculture), and Grant Roberts (CSIRO Plant Industry). Award for Communication to Industry: David Kelly (QDPI) – for his outstanding extension efforts in the Emerald region and more broadly throughout the industry. Award for Corporate Citizenship Stephen Yeates (CSIRO Plant Industry) – for his role in promoting CRC activities across northern Australia in what is always a difficult environment. We had five extraordinary acts entertain us at the Review Dinner – these were drawn from the audience in what became the First (of Many) Australian Cotton CRC Talent Quest. The contenders were Dr Ian Taylor and his Klara who did an excellent rendition of Two Little Boys – with PowerPoint photo’s, Dr Mary Whitehouse played the base guitar, Dr Steve Milroy recited his own brand of poetry, the Pitfall Trap Family Singers (Dave Murray’s Queensland Team) sang – see following extract – to the music of a Sound of Music and Sarah Hood the unanimous winner presented her own brand of stand up comedy. Pitfall Trap Family Singers – words to Sound of Music Doh the cash that cotton makes. Ray, the light that makes it grows. Me, part of the industry. Far away we sell the crop. Sow it just in time each year. Lah it has no place in here Te with B reduces fear That will bring us in more Doh, ho, ho, ho….. 1 A group photo of some of the attendees of the Australian Cotton CRC Research Review in Toowoomba. The format worked well and allowed more engagement than in the past. The meeting involved our Advisory Committee (Glen fresser, Dr Graeme Hammer, John Harrison and Kevin Goss) some of whom gave presentations and gave good exposure of the Postgrad students. Evan Cleland and Bob Galmes also attended. During the two-day meeting we also announced Cotton CRC Awards for 2002. These were presented at the dinner to the following: Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter. Your Local Show
There’s nothing quite like the local show to really be a part of your local community…. do your part in judging crops …… and discover some surprising hidden talents in the CRC. • We’ve had Pothole (Greg Roberts) secretly enter Sandra Deutscher’s paintings in the Narrabri show (wasn’t he stunned when she won first prize!). Sarah Hood’s lent her organising talents to help with the dramas of the St George Miss Showgirl quest. And this photo shows the very proud “Second Best Scone Maker in Narrabri” – well so the show judges thought even though it was only the second ever batch made by Guy Roth! Australian Cotton Conference, Brisbane Convention Centre, August 13-15 • • The CRC was well represented at this year’s conference with a professional stand adjoining the QLD Water Use Efficiency stand. Congratulations to the recipients of the Researcher of the Year Awards: 2001 - Dr John Triantifilis (University of Sydney) 2 Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter.
2002 - Dave Kelly (QDPI, Emerald) the respective teams involved with their development. Well done to all.” Rural Water Use Efficiency Initiative
The Cotton-Grains component of this substantial project is conducted through the Cotton CRC by DPIQ and funded by QDNRM. The current project is funded to June 2003 and planning is well underway with government and industry to determine how and in what form the project may have another phase. A new project would involve a similar partnership of industry and government and may encompass a broader natural resource management focus with implementation of BMP being a major activity in cotton. Cotton Australia is committed to project delivery being maintained through the CRC. In addition to Qld government funds, DPIQ are seeking support from Catchment Associations to supplement the project. Well done and well deserved to both. John and David are integral members of the Cotton CRC and the awards recognise their excellent contributions to key research issues that challenge the industry. Overall the Conference Program tried to cover a broad range of issues and included some of the big issues of natural resource management and world markets that must be faced. Most of the presentations were of high quality, and the grower presenters were particularly impressive - it is clearly no accident that the industry is so dynamic. Excellent presentations by many CRC staff gave good exposure for both the CRC and our participant organisations, but the key objective for such conferences is to highlight the outcomes of our many activities in support of the industry. At our Australian Cotton CRC stand the specific issues of water use efficiency; CottonLOGIC, WeedPak and the IDM Guidelines were covered. Several positive comments were received about the professional appearance and operation of the information stands and the excellent quality of the new products launched during the conference CottonLOGIC for the Palm, WeedPAK and the IDM Guidelines are all high quality products from 3 Supplementary Bid – Managing and Enhancing Agricultural Landscapes
In late May the CRC submitted a proposal for an additional $3 million funding over 3 years to establish a new program on “Managing and Enhancing Agricultural Environments”. The program will cover many aspects of natural resource management and provide the guidelines to maintain the cotton industry’s ongoing efforts to enhance sustainability. Unfortunately, in September, we learnt that the Supplementary bid was unsuccessful. However, we propose to continue with a new program in this area of work and are actively seeking ways to resource the many great ideas and new collaboration in the new program. Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter. New Publications
IDM (Integrated Disease management) Guidelines and WeedPAK were completed for release at the Australian Cotton Conference, August 13-15. Both have been very well received and represent excellent collaborative outcomes from many research and extension staff. Resource Management. Some 190 projects were submitted for judging over all the categories. On November 2nd at a function on the Gold Coast, CottonLOGIC for PalmOS was judged the WINNER of the Asia Pacific ICT Awards in the Natural Resource Management category. Mike Bange, Darren Linsley and Stewart Whiteside (all CSIRO Plant Industry and CRC) attended the award ceremony. An award like this, particularly in the Natural Resource Management Category is tremendous recognition for the product itself, the development team and the role that CottonLOGIC has in supporting a sustainable cotton industry. It gives us a strong message to support the environmental credentials of modern cotton production systems. The criteria for the Natural Resource Management Award were based on level of innovation, on the application being locally developed, and that the application supports the preservation of or enhances the natural or human environment of Australia for the benefit of the community. CottonLOGIC for the PalmOS and the team will now represent Australia in this category at the International ICT Awards to be held in Cairns next year. Congratulations to all involved. River Symposium, Brisbane September 4-6 2002 Cotton CRC had a significant presence at this symposium with our display, our Good News Brochure in the conference bag, several posters and two submitted talks. The Symposium Theme was “The Scarcity of Water” and included one section on “Rivers and Irrigation” with a strong focus on the Murray Darling Basin and posing the question – “Can our rivers continue to support irrigated agriculture?” Presentations and participants at the conference were overwhelming against irrigation and agriculture broadly. The WEEDpak Team: Dr Ian Taylor (NSW Agriculture), Grant Roberts (CSIRO Plant Industry), Dr Stephen Johnston (University of New England), Leah McKinnon (University of New England) and Graham Charles (NSW Agriculture), with the new WEEDpak manual. CottonLOGIC
As you are aware CSIRO and the Cotton CRC launched the hand-held version of CottonLOGIC (CottonLOGIC for the PalmOS) at this years Australian Cotton Conference in August. Dr. Mike Bange (CSIRO Plant Industry) who leads the development team, also nominated the new management tool for the 2002 Asia Pacific Information-Communication-Telecommunication Awards in the category of tools for Natural 4 Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter.
The Symposium included a Debate on the Question of “Should Australia’s Northern Rivers be developed”. Subtext for the debate was "Should the rivers of northern Australia be developed so that the area can be opened up for cotton farming? Should the rivers be dammed or used for irrigation or left as wild rivers? Two teams will debate these contentious questions." So the debate was projected as cotton vs. environment. Chaired by Don Blackmore (CEO Murray Darling Basin Commission). The speakers included: For Development - Ralph Leutton (Cotton Australia), Bob Katter (MP, Kennedy), Ian Whan (Resource Economist), Against Development - Peter Cullen (ex Freshwater Ecology CRC), Barry Trail (Wilderness Society), Nick Heath (Qld Seafood Industry). Not surprisingly the outcome was strongly against development. Ralph Leutton did an excellent job in a hostile environment, but some presentations were outrageous. The symposium also included a Hypothetical hosted by Peter Couchman. Topic: a pristine river – should we dam it and irrigate or leave it alone? Panel included John Grabbe (Cubbie Station), Bob Katter, John Williams (CSIRO L&W) among others. Overall the outcome was not good for agriculture. Lippia Workshop June 26, Narrabri Together with the Weeds CRC and Murray Darling Basin Commission we organised a workshop to discuss the growing threat of Lippia – a severe environmental weed in the northern MDB. Although not specifically a cotton issue, Lippia does affect many cotton growers who have riparian lands or floodplains where the weed damages river banks and reduces the value of pasture. Estimates are that Lippia now covers 800,000 ha of land and so far has cost about $140 million in reduced land values with an annual cost of $4 million in reduced productivity. A four stage R&D program was developed and a steering committee established. This was comprised of Catchment Board reps and some 5 scientists. Cotton CRC has pledged to jointly support a student project on Lippia ecology. Other Activities and Developments
CRC Association Conference May 21-23, Sydney Theme this year was CRCs: Capturing Creativity - People, Ideas, and Enterprise. Cotton CRC was one of four selected to be showcased at the Conference. Dr Gary Fitt gave a presentation on the following topic: Areawide management of cotton pests: a triumph of science and cooperation. AFFA Science and Innovation Award for Young People, August 22, Canberra Three cotton industry staff were successful in gaining AFFA awards each valued at $8000 to support specific projects. These were: Nicky Schick (CRC Research Liaison Officer, pictured below) – Cotton Industry Award - project on the types of incentives and institutional structures
required for the industry to fully embrace natural resource management Andrew Davies (CRC PhD student) – Western Australian Regional Awards – project examining
biological control agents that could assist cotton expansion in northern regions Sven Delaney (CRDC PhD Student) – South Australian Regional Award – project on cotton fibre development A total of 18 awards were given. Research Threads: 2nd Edition The Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre – Newsletter. Babies & Engagements News (There must’ve been something in the water…)
Well last issue saw the reports of a multitude of babies welcomed to the families of the Australian Cotton Cooperative Research Centre. Now we are starting from the beginning and experiencing a multitude of engagements! There must have been something in the air that weekend of the footy finals with two engagements that Friday night! Congratulations to our happy couples: Olivia Whiteoak (RWUE, Goondiwindi) and Steve Parker Annie Spora (Cotton IDO, Lower Namoi) and Steve Johnson (Weeds Researcher, ACRI); Evan Brown (Cotton IDO, Griffith) and Alison Baker. There’s also the baby news from: Amelia and Ben Reddall (CSIRO PI, Narrabri) a son Kemmis. Mary Whitehouse (CSIRO Entomology, Narrabri) and Alex Schlack (NSW Agriculture, Narrabri) a daughter Lillia. Jo (CSIRO PL, Narrabri) & Tim (NSW Agriculture, Narrabri) Weaver a daughter Mackenzie. Warwick (CSIRO PI) & Louise Stiller a daughter Emily Congratulations to Dr Gary Fitt (pictured above) who was recently awarded the prestigious Mackerras medal of the Australian Entomological Society. The highest award of the Australian entomological community, it recognises Gary’s excellence in the scientific field of insect pest ecology and management. It’s not the first gong our CEO, and former head of CSIRO’s Cotton Research Unit, has received, with other awards including Cotton researcher of the year (1993), a Special Commendation for Sir Ian McLennan Achievement for Industry Award (1999) and Fellow of the Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (2001). Participation in the Third World Cotton Research Conference Capetown, March 03 CRC and CRDC have pooled funds to support participation by Australian researchers and extension staff at the next WCRCIII to be held in South Africa. Twenty-one staff that will receive support were recently advised. Overall we expect a strong performance for Australia’s cotton scientists on this forum to match outstanding efforts at the 1st (Brisbane) and 2nd (Athens) World Conference. 6 
