 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeResearchFisheries Modelling Report Resource Futures Home Program Contacts Resource Futures A report by Bob Kearney of Applied Ecology Research Group, University of Canberra, and Barney Foran, Franzi Poldy, and Don Lowe of Resource Futures Program, CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems Accessing the Report About the Report Enquiries Accessing the Report The policy and management implications document is available for download in Adobe Acrobat pdf format. If you are unable to access or read this file format, please contact the Resource Futures Program at CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems. cse.resfutures@csiro.au. Modelling Australia's Fisheries to 2050: Policy and Management Implications (40 page report) PDF Document (1.65Kb) About the Report This report is a joint project by the University of Canberra and CSIRO for the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation (FRDC). Using historical data on 220 separate Australian fisheries, the project has created a modelling framework that provides estimates of future yields under alternative fishing strategies, and develops scenarios for fisheries supply and demand to 2050. The fisheries model is embedded in the Australian Stocks and Flows Framework (ASFF)1 that represents economic activity, resource use and environmental impact over the whole economy and provides the context for activity in the fisheries sector. Given the world context of fisheries management, and the long- term link between population growth, economic development and fish production, this study for Australia had five goals: To analyse the long-range perspective of tensions between fisheries demand and production at a national level for use in fisheries policy development. To identify and quantify the linkages between the demands generated by human population growth and affluence and their effects on a range of natural resources, particularly capture fisheries and aquaculture. To test a range of policy options which address demand and supply imbalances at a national level out to 2050. To strengthen future fisheries management policies by providing a comprehensive, long-term view of the dynamics of production and demand for resources. To enable fisheries to be properly incorporated into an on-going national program of modelling future natural resource demand and demographic influences. To provide a simplified interpretation of Australia's total long-term resource demands and likely production to enable the fishing industry to better understand their relationship with other resource users and with national development policies. This report is a 'must have' for fisheries managers and policy makers. 1 ASFF and the embedded fisheries module are implemented using the whatIf? suite of modelling tools developed and distributed by whatIf? Technologies Inc. (formerly Robbert Associates Ltd), of Ottawa, Canada. Enquiries Please send all enquries to CSE Resource Futures. cse.resfutures@csiro.au. This page last updated 27 September, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
