 CSIRO Home Contact Us Site Map SEARCH HOME NEWS &amp; INFORMATION RESEARCH CLIENT SERVICES ABOUT US CSE HomeLibrary Services Contact Us Gungahlin Library Services Home CSIRO Library Catalogue Other Library Catalogues Databases CSIRO Electronic Journal Collection (Login Required) CSIRO Staff Publications Request an Interlibrary Loan (Login Required) Request purchase of Library materials (Staff Only) Notify Library of new CSE Publication (CSE Staff Only) Reference Tools Guides and Help Interesting Sites Contact Us Feedback Policies and Services CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems Library, Gungahlin Access Collections, Journal display Reference and Information Services Finding Library Materials New Orders Purchasing Borrowing and Interlibrary Loans Other Services Staff contact details History Access CSE Library Services supports the Divisional research programs and therefore our priority clients are Divisional staff. All Divisional staff and other authorised users may access the library during working hours (8.30am - 5pm). After hours access is available for authorised users. Access by non-CSIRO staff is by appointment only - please contact the Gungahlin Library. We have a range of client groups co-located on the Gungahlin site to whom we also provide access to the Gungahlin Library. Access conditions are provided in more detail. Collections The Collection Gungahlin Library has approximately 150 current print journals, access to a vast amount of electronic journals and holds about 20,000 monographs. Relevant material is held in a variety of formats including microfilm or microfiche, print, CD-Rom and Web-based. As electronic information and speedy document supply services develop, more emphasis is being placed on access to information rather than ownership. The CSIRO Electronic Journal Collection (EJC) delivers scientific journals to the desktops of CSIRO staff in electronic format. Users with Nexus Domain access and the Adobe Acrobat Reader can browse, search and print journal articles in the WWW environment using the ScienceServer system. The ScienceServer platform also hosts the Compendex (Engineering) and SCANfile databases. Journal Display Journals are displayed for three weeks on the racks in the reading area of the Gungahlin Library. New journal issues are put out each day onto the Week 1 display shelves as they are received. Reference and Information Services Reference services The library holds a wide range of scientific and general reference books, and has a specialised collection of indexes and abstracts. The Library Reference Bay is situated near the main entrance to the library and opposite the computer terminals. On request library staff will carry out literature searches and compile bibliographies. The library has facilitated access for staff to a wide range of on-line information services - a list of databases and online reference materials. If you have any queries about using these resources or would like assistance in locating information, please contact the Library staff - by email, phone or in-person. Finding Library Materials Catalogues Both a card catalogue and an online catalogue (OPAC) are available. The card catalogue began in 1954 and was not closed until December 1993. Holdings were added to the computer catalogue beginning in 1985, so there is an overlap. It may be necessary to search both catalogues, as although a program of retrospective cataloguing is underway, some items such as journals which the library has held from the time of its establishment may not be listed on the on-line catalogue. The CSIRO Library Network online catalogue (Voyager) includes records for all CSIRO libraries. When searching for an item, take note of the location details - the location and symbols for the Sustainable Ecosystems libraries are: Centre for Arid Zone Research, Alice Springs (XS:AL) Davies Laboratory, Townsville (QS:TL) Sustainable Ecosystems, Gungahlin (AS:WR) Tropical Forest Research Centre, Atherton (QS:TFR) Tropical Ecosystems Research Centre, Darwin (XS:DAR) The CSIRO Library Network catalogue (Voyager), is available online. Finding items on the Shelves The classification system used by the Sustainable Ecosystems libraries is the Universal Decimal Classification. Classification numbers are built up by extension of the decimal fractions. For convenience when writing numbers the initial decimal point is omitted. The following shelf sequences are used in Gungahlin Library: T A book or monograph (Not printed on spine labels or used in the card catalogue) F Folios (larger sized books) P Journals (i.e. periodicals, serials) Pam Pamphlets (housed in filing cabinets) Ref Reference material, such as dictionaries A Abstracts Journals If you are looking to see whether the Library holds a particular journal title or issue, (print or electronic) the best place to start is to check the CSIRO Library Network Catalogue. If you are in the Library, we have put a quick-check guide, located near the main entrance, that is an alphabetical list of the journal titles and their classification number (shelf location). This list does not include information about which issues the Library actually holds and is only intended for a quick-check guide. Borrowing and Interlibrary Loan Borrowing Books, pamphlets and journal issues are available on loan. For material with a barcode library staff will lend material using our automated library system. Older materials use a loan card system. Please remember to check out material before leaving the library. With the loan card system remember to sign and date the loan cards, and leave both copies of the card in the box on the loans desk. The loan period for new circulating items is four weeks, other material may be borrowed for longer periods. Material on 'permanent loan' is lent on the understanding that items will be released for a short time if required by another staff member. Returns Simply leave books and journals on the shelves marked RETURNS near the Loans Desk. New Book Display and Circulation The New Book Display is located in the Reading Room, past the photocopier. New books are displayed for 3 weeks. If you wish to borrow the book at a later date, write your name on the loan card inside the back cover, but do not date it. You will receive a notice from the library when the item is ready for collection - new circulating books waiting collection are kept on a shelf near the Returned Loans section. Inter-library Loans Items not held in the Library can usually be obtained from other sources either as a loan or a copy. A fast-track service exists for urgent requests, usually supplied within 24 hours. For items not held in Australia overseas document delivery services are used which fax papers usually within 48 hours. For an inter-library loan, please complete a Photocopy Request and Declaration form, available at the Loans Desk or complete the online request form (Nexus login required). More information is available about Interlibrary Loans and document delivery. Translations CSIRO does not have an in-house Translation Service, but library staff can assist you to find an external translator for most European and Asian languages. These translators charge normal commercial rates. More information is available from the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters Ltd. New Orders All staff are welcome to make suggestions for the purchase of new material. New blurbs from a wide range of publishers are placed in a basket near the Journal Reading Area for your perusal. Please use the online form to request purchase of library materials. Purchasing For the benefit of new staff and staff who may have forgotten, it is official CSIRO policy (http://www.csiro.au/doco/policy/pc91_04.htm and http://www.csiro.au/finance/findir/wcontent.htm) that all books and publications purchased from CSIRO funds, regardless of fund source, be recorded in the catalogue and ordered through the library. Library staff can assist in placing orders for books, manuals, audio-visual materials, technical books and journals where appropriate. Recording material in the library catalogue ensures that duplication of purchasing in minimised, loans are recorded and assists in keeping track of publications. Conference proceedings obtained as part of registration fees paid by CSIRO fall into the same category and should be recorded on the catalogue. Recording material on the catalogue assists staff who have not attended the conference to use the information for their research. The only books that do not need to be purchased through the Library are computer manuals and laboratory manuals, ie. tools of trade. If any further information is required please contact Tricia Kelly (CSE Library Services Manager) or Wendy Hirst (Acquisition Officer) at the Gungahlin Library. Other Services Use of Other ACT Libraries CSIRO Staff have reciprocal borrowing and photocopying rights at the ANU libraries and at other CSIRO libraries in the ACT. Photocopiers at the ANU are card-operated and you will need some form of CSIRO identification, (such as your official name badge with CSIRO logo) when you ask ANU library staff for a photocopy card. If you need to use Black Mountain Library frequently it may be possible to arrange a card-key for after hours access. Study carrels There are nine study carrels available in the library - most have power and a network connection. You are welcome to use these for quiet study and reading. Photocopiers, Microfilm and Microfiche Readers There are 2 library photocopiers located in the library area. You will need your programs photocopy codes (or swipe cards) in order to use the machines. Microfiche and microfilm readers are located at the south west corner of the library. Staff contact details Tricia Kelly CSE Library Services Manager (02) 6242 1659 Margaret Hindley Reference, Cataloguing (02) 6242 1605 Wendy Hirst Acquisitions (02) 6242 1745 Megan Edwards Loans (02) 6242 1773 Anne Towill Loans (02) 6242 1773 Library fax (02) 6242 1536 Library Email Address CSE-Library@csiro.au or aswr@csiro.au Ariel document delivery address ariel-aswr@library.csiro.au Postal Address The Library CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems GPO Box 284 CANBERRA ACT 2601 Street Address CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems Bellenden Street CRACE ACT 2911 History The Gungahlin Library was established in 1954, and is located on the Gungahlin site on the outskirts of Canberra. This Library is part of a network of reference libraries, holding core working collections, located in each of the regional laboratories. The Division's libraries aim to provide excellent library and information support to the research programs, by supplying timely and relevant information. They achieve this by providing a collection of appropriate books, journals and other material; also by calling on the resources of other CSIRO and Australian libraries, and accessing world-wide information sources. Since its establishment Gungahlin Library has developed a strong collection in wildlife management, regional faunas and ornithology. As the research interests of the Division have diversified over the last 10 years, and as restructuring has transferred research groups to Gungahlin, collections have also been added in decision support systems, rangeland ecology, soil ecology, ecotourism, and vertebrate pests. Molecular biology material has been added since the CRC on Biological Control of Vertebrate Pest Populations (now the Pest Animal Control CRC) was established in 1992. This page last updated 16 January, 2006 Legal Notice & Disclaimer and Privacy Statement © Copyright CSIRO Australia 2000 - 2006 
