 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationDr Richard Helmer modeling the tee shirt.Photo by Mr Frank Filippi, CTFT.Dr Richard Helmer: engineering next generation intelligent textilesResearcher and musician Dr Richard Helmer has developed a virtual guitar based on a tee shirt with built-in movement sensors linked by wireless to a computer. Background Live on stage Diapers and batteries Background Dr Helmer specialises in adding electronic functionality to flexible materials such as textiles, paper and films. Dr Helmer has an Bachelors with Honours Degree in Engineering, a Bachelor of Science and a Doctorate, all&#160;from the University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. As a Research Engineer at CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology (CTFT), he has been developing commercial applications in electronic and intelligent textiles for four years. He built the virtual or &#8216;air guitar&#8217; to test his ideas on the feasibility of using electronic sensors in textiles to interface with computers. Live on stage The project draws on Dr Helmer&#8217;s lifelong interest in music &#8212; he&#8217;s a songwriter, drummer, guitarist, keyboardist and home recording enthusiast. He&#8217;s also a veteran live performer with the Melbourne band Madhouse, with many cameos in other groups. &#8220;Electronic garments worn by users will be strong contenders for the control systems linking people to their electronic devices.&#8221; Dr Richard Helmer, Research Engineer, CSIRO Textile and Fibre Technology The air guitar consists of a regular tee shirt with integrated electronic circuitry, incorporating movement and strain sensors. These interface with a computer through a built-in wireless transmitter in the shirt. For the computer, Dr Helmer with assistance from a German exchange student Mr Thorsten Karrer, has written software that plays sampled guitar parts (notes, chords, riffs) in response to the player&#8217;s arm movements. He says most people would find the instrument easy to play. 'They don&#8217;t need advanced musical or computing skills,' he says. 'And players have complete freedom of movement, with no wires to trip over.' Diapers and batteries Dr Helmer believes that as mobile computing becomes more widespread, electronic garments worn by users will be strong contenders for the control systems linking people to their electronic devices. Using technology similar to the air guitar, Dr Helmer is working with CTFT electronics textiles team to add advanced functionality to a wide range of textile products. These could find application in entertainment, sports medicine, rehabilitation, and medicine. For example, he&#8217;s developing: a garment with sensors to represent the human form in three-dimensions incontinence sensors for adult pads to assist nursing staff comfortable sensors for monitoring heart condition and vital signs small light batteries that can be &#8216;woven&#8217; into garments. He also researches smart packaging (electrochromic barcoding) in association with the Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) for Functional Communication Surfaces. Find our more about&#160;our electronic textiles work in 'It's not rocket science... it's rockin' science'. Profile Name: Dr Richard Helmer Title: Research Engineer Qualifications: BSc&#160; B Eng (Hon) PhD Expertise: electronics engineering Current projects: air guitar sports technologies body mapping textile batteries Primary Contact Dr Richard Helmer (BEng(Hons) BSc PhD)Research EngineerCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4129 Alt Phone: 61 3 9545 2283 Fax: 61 3 5246 4057 Email: Richard.Helmer&#64;csiro.auContact Air Guitar Mailing GroupCSIRO Textile &amp; Fibre TechnologyPhone: 61 3 5246 4000 Fax: 61 3 52464057 Email: airguitar&#64;csiro.auLocation Textile &amp; Fibre Technology - BelmontColac RoadBelmont VIC 3216AustraliaTechnology Geelong LaboratoriesPO Box 21Belmont VIC 3216Australia© Copyright CSIRO 2006 
