 Return to normal viewCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research OrganisationDr Chris Margules co-discovered the principle of 'complementarity' in conservation planning.Dr Chris Margules: systematic conservation planningDr Chris Margules is a Principal Research Scientist with CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems Tropical Landscapes Research Program and also plays a key role in the Federal Government's Marine and Tropical Science Research Facility. Current activities Background Academic qualifications Achievements Current activities Dr Margules has a part-time science leadership and mentoring role with CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems(CSE). He leads the rainforests and catchments research program of the Marine and Tropical Science Research Facility in north Queensland. This research program seeks to: understand the condition, trend and interdependencies of environmental assets of the region develop methods to support ongoing regular assessment and reporting develop methods to identify priorities for action. His current research interests focus on: management of biological diversity -&#160;how and why populations decline and what can be done about it planning for biological diversity -&#160;assessing where in the landscape should areas for biodiversity protection be located. He also works for Conservation International as the Executive Director of the Melanesia Centre for Biodiversity Conservation. Background Dr Chris Margules joined CSIRO in 1973 as a Technical Assistant. Throughout his scientific career, Dr Margules has been motivated by a desire to &#8216;make a difference on the ground&#8217;.&#160; He aims to ensure that a triple bottom line philosophy is adopted in biological conservation to allow for whole of landscape management solutions that will strengthen the protection of biodiversity while also fostering community and business growth. Dr Margules was Leader of CSE's Tropical Landscapes Research Program from its inception in 2001 until late 2006. Whole of tropical landscape management solutions strengthen biodiversity conservation, while ensuring community and business growth. Dr Margules' expertise includes: ecology landscape ecology&#160; experimental design&#160; biogeography research management. Academic qualifications After being awarded a Bachelor of Applied Science and a Graduate Diploma in Recreation Planning, Dr Margules&#160;completed a Doctor of Philosophy&#160;at the University of York, United Kingdom, in 1981, studying quantitative ecology.&#160; Achievements Dr Margules&#160;has gained an international reputation in conservation biology and conservation planning. He has been involved in several ecological and conservation research achievements including: co-discovery (with colleagues Faith, Pressey, Nicholls and Williams) and implementation of&#160;the principle of &#8216;complementarity&#8217; in conservation planning and policy development, which has now been adopted in numerous jurisdictions throughout the world establishment of&#160;the Wog Wog habitat fragmentation experiment, one of the most influential long-term (15 years) ecological studies on habitat fragmentation development (with colleagues Faith, Nicholls, Hutchinson and Nix) of BioRap, a conservation planning toolbox to help countries prioritise their biodiversity planning. It is the only set of publications to describe the entire systematic conservation planning process, from data collection through to data treatments and implementation. Dr Margules has received a number of awards including: Member in the General Division of the Order of Australia (AM), 2005 Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) highly cited researcher, 2004 Fellowship, Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, Germany,1994 and&#160;1997. Read more about&#160;CSIRO&#8217;s work on&#160;Biodiversity &amp; Ecology. Scientist Profile Name: Dr Chris Margules Title: Principal Research Scientist Qualifications: BAppSc GradDipRecPlan PhD Current projects: condition and trend of rainforest catchments science leadership and mentoring Expertise: ecology landscape ecology experimental design biogeography Primary Contact Ms Louise MatthiessonCommunication and Liaison OfficerCSIRO Sustainable EcosystemsPhone: 61 7 3214 2642 Fax: 61 7 3214 2308 Email: Louise.Matthiesson&#64;csiro.auContact Dr Chris MargulesPrincipal Research ScientistCSIRO Sustainable EcosystemsPhone: 61 7 4091 8800 Alt Phone: 61 7 4091 8803 Email: Chris.Margules&#64;csiro.auLocation CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems - AthertonMaunds RoadAtherton QLD 4883AustraliaPO Box 780Atherton QLD 4883Australia© Copyright CSIRO 2006 
