 ISSUE 3 • DECEMBER 2003 earthmatters
C S I R O E X P L O R AT I O N & M I N I N G Q U A R T E R LY M A G A Z I N E Drilling harder or drilling smarter? 3 5 7 National interest
Research gains backing Exploration efficiency holds key
I
n Canberra, the culmination of thousands of hours of work put into the Mineral Exploration Action Agenda and the Prosser Inquiry into Impediments to Exploration has been transferred into departmental recommendations and is making its way through the Government processes. The evidence and submissions were written when commodity prices were low and falling and exploration incentives were therefore at an alltime low. How things change! Now commodity prices are up and resource shares are improving. Changed circumstances highlight the arguments that, while increased exploration is good and should inevitably lead to more finds, increased exploration activity informed by new technologies and geological insights could give Australia a distinct advantage. Not only will investment into these technologies ensure the long-term viability of Australia as an exploration destination by tackling the fundamental problem that 70 per cent of Australia’s surface is covered by soil and sediment, it will provide the capacity to find more low-cost ore bodies to help Australia survive and prosper even when commodity prices drop once more as they inevitably will. Another argument for more effective exploration surfaced a few weeks ago. Much exploration is conducted in delicate and marginal ecosystems. Roads put through as part of the exploration process can take years or even decades to regrow naturally. It is only a matter of time before environmental concerns are added to the costs incurred by unsuccessful drilling. The case for investment in technologies to improve effectiveness and reduce the environmental impact of exploration is compelling (see cover story, Pages 3-7). Like others in the mining industry, we at CSIRO have adapted to the changing circumstances. We went through a long consultation process with the mineral industry to determine industry needs and are now implementing changes. We are focusing exploration research activities at our laboratory in Perth (half of Australian exploration occurs in Western Australia). The specific themes for our work are: • • • • Where to explore Recognising ore systems Exploring through cover Knowing what to mine. Value of science
Support for new tools Treasure trove
Yandal comes up trumps 8 10 Face to face
Andrew Michelmore Guiding light
New scope for minerals 12 Grains of truth
Unearthing vital clues The reorganisation has allowed the emergence of some bright young scientists to complement the vast experience that CSIRO has built up over three decades. Once again the mineral industry is looking for the conceptual breakthroughs that lifted the gold industry from a $100 million industry in the Eighties to a $5 billion pa industry in the Nineties. Professor Neil Phillips Chief, CSIRO Exploration & Mining Bronzewing breakthrough: The Bronzewing discovery in 1992 was a result of scientists and explorers working closely together 14 16 18 19 New connections
Web’s missing link Stress tests
Waves improve safety Ask our scientists
Andrew King From the literature
Key scientific papers earthmatters is produced by CSIRO Exploration &
Mining. Views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of CSIRO Exploration & Mining management. ISSN 1448-336X Managing Editor: Keith Bashford - keith.bashford@csiro.au Editor: Tony Heselev - hcc@netspace.net.au Design: Liz Butler - liz.butler@csiro.au Cover illustration: Nigel Buchanan CSIRO Exploration & Mining Box 312 Clayton South, Victoria 3169 tel: +61 3 9545 8202 fax: +61 3 9545 8222 www.em.csiro.au
© 2003 CSIRO Exploration & Mining All rights reserved. No part of this document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, photocopied or otherwise dealt with without the prior written permission of CSIRO Exploration & Mining For your own copy of earthmatters
To be added to our mailing list please email: earthmattersmailinglist@csiro.au For electronic version: www.em.csiro.au/earthmatters 2 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 COVER STORY The $5 billion gap
A new report shows the substantial value to Australia that flows from scientific advances in mineral exploration. Graham White reports A new report from the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics provides powerful support for the recommendations of three recent government studies that called for greater investment in research to reinvigorate mineral exploration. The ABARE report, Research and Development in Leaders Group report as part of the Mineral Exploration Action Agenda and the West Australian Government’s Bowler Report, each of which recommended substantial increased investment in exploration technology. The studies were initiated in response to a dramatic decline in mineral exploration in Australia – a 49 per cent slump in real terms between 1996-97 and 2001-02 to the lowest level recorded since 1978-79. Despite a modest recovery since, activity is still at historically low levels and this raises concerns for the future of the industry, which provides 30 per cent of Australia’s earnings from the export of goods and services. Exploration and Mining: Implications for Australia’s Gold Industry, suggests that research advances in gold exploration could return Australia an additional $3.6 billion a year in exports by 2015. This would lift gold exports from the current level of $4.7 billion a year to a projected $8.3 billion a year (at constant prices). The progressive growth to that figure suggests there would be cumulative additional exports of more than $20 billion over those 12 years. That represents a significant return on the proposed seven-year Deep Ore Discovery research program recommended by the Mineral Exploration Action Agenda, which is expected to cost a total of $140 million. Conversely, failure to develop new technologies could see exports decline by $1.4 billion a year, the report suggests. The ABARE study, commissioned by CSIRO Exploration & Mining, supports the Federal Parliament’s Prosser Inquiry into Impediments to Exploration, the Federal Minister’s Strategic The impact of R&D on Australia's gold industry
Million ounces gold pa Exports per year ($bn) 20 10 18 9 16 Strong investment in research leads to production increases similar to the Eighties, and a $3.6 billion annual increase in exports 14
Moderate investment in R&D delivers some new techniques and a modest $1.1 billion annual increase in exports Sc a en rio 3 8 A $5 billion annual gap between high and low exploration success rates indicates the importance of the $140 million Deep Ore Discovery research program 7 12 10 Australia has experienced periods of exploration success driven by technological breakthroughs, but exploration success will become increasingly difficult using existing technologies, leading to exports declining by $1.4 billion a year 6 $4.7bn Scenari o2
5 8 4 Sce
6 Australia's gold production 4 nar io 1 3 2 2 1 0 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2003 2005 2010 2015 0 This chart is based on three success rate scenarios outlined in the ABARE report. Scenario 3 (high success rate) assumes 2.1 tonnes of gold per million dollars of exploration expenditure. Scenario 2 (medium) assumes 1.2 tonnes of gold per million dollars of exploration expenditure and Scenario 1 (low) assumes 0.3 tonnes of gold per million dollars of exploration expenditure. earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 3 COVER STORY
The $5 billion gap
continued The ABARE report did not forecast what form the advances in technology might take or the likely returns from any particular breakthrough. Instead it took a historical perspective and traced the increases and decreases in exploration success each year from 1980 to 2001. This revealed that throughout this period there were marked differences in the efficiency of exploration, as measured by the additional gold ore discovered per million dollars spent on exploration. While there were other contributing factors (including, at times, pure luck), the most significant influence on these changes in efficiency was technology – improved knowledge about the occurrence of gold ores, improved exploration tools and improved extraction methods. The improved exploration theory and technology increased the effectiveness of exploration activity, and also tended to attract substantial additional investment in exploration because of the increased success rate. This was spectacularly demonstrated during the 1980s. Higher gold prices led to generally increased exploration activity around the world. However, Western Australia and Nevada experienced startling increases in production, far ahead of the rest of the world. In Australia, production rose from a mere 17 tonnes of gold a year in 1980 to 244 tonnes a year by 1990. Natural endowment was an essential precondition for discovery, but another key differentiator between Australia and the rest of the world was greatly improved understanding of the way in which gold deposits were formed, in particular improved knowledge of weathering and the structural control of deposits and the role of carbonate alteration haloes. These additional clues were particularly relevant to the geology of Western Australia and to parts of Nevada and – along with other research advances – help explain the extraordinary resurgence of discoveries in both those regions, which were previously considered mature and or relatively wellexplored. By studying the varying efficiencies of exploration at different times during the review period and their effect on exploration activity, the ABARE team, led by Senior Economist Lindsay Hogan, was able to develop three scenarios for Australian gold exploration in the period to 2015. The first assumed a discovery rate of 0.3 tonnes of gold per million dollars of exploration expenditure. This is consistent with minimum returns achieved during the review period. The second assumed a discovery rate of 1.2 tonnes of gold per million dollars spent and is consistent with average success rates between 1990 and 2001. The third assumed a success rate of 2.1 tonnes per million – equivalent to the discovery rates achieved during peak success periods. This third scenario – which is the one that would result in exports rising to $8.3 billion a year by 2015 – would almost certainly require significant research progress. The first scenario, which sees a loss of production of $1.4 billion a year by 2015 - would in all probability be valid only if there are no advances in understanding or technology (recognising that many of today’s existing mines have relatively short lives; in the absence of new discoveries, many will halt production or go into decline during the forecast period). It is this $5 billion annual difference between export gains of $3.6 billion a year by 2015 or NEWSPIX/PETER CLARK a reduction of $1.4 billion a year that makes the case for investment in mineral exploration technology and theory so compelling.
Federal Resources Minister Ian Macfarlane, who established the Mineral Exploration Action Agenda The ABARE report also makes a strong case for this research to be publicly funded, rather than left to the industry. This is because the gold sector is characterised by a relatively large number of explorers and operators, most of which do not have the capacity or incentive to fund sustained research, particularly as successful research would benefit competitors as much as themselves. The great benefactor from a resurgent Australian gold industry would be the national balance of payments. As the ABARE report makes clear, the impact of a gold sector that performed at the lowest of the three proposed scenarios would be export losses every year equivalent to the impact of the recent drought, but year-in, year-out. Reference: Hogan L. Research and Development in Exploration and Mining: Implications for Australia’s Gold Industry, ABARE Economics, Canberra, November 2003. LINK
To access a pdf copy of the ABARE report, see mineral publications at www.abare.gov.au or www.em.csiro.au To receive a free hard copy of the report, contact Keith Bashford at keith.bashford@csiro.au Australia's gold production and exports 2015
(by success rate assumption) Unit
Gold production b Gold exports c Quantity Value t t 00-01 $bn 1980
17 na na 1990
244 227 4.1 2000
296 257 4.1 2003a
283 273 4.7 Low
0.3 tonnes Au/$m Medium High 1.2 tonnes Au/$m 2.1 tonnes Au/$m 198 188 3.3 342 332 5.8 485 476 8.3 a ABARE estimate b Mine production, metal content c Exports of Australian origin, based on metal content. Exports in 2015 are valued at real export unit values in 2002 4 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 Source: ABARE Economics COVER STORY Lifting the lid Chris Bonwick: “It is a strategic issue for Australia to be discovering ore bodies in Australia” Australian junior explorers say that a new generation of exploration and drilling tools are needed to help discover ore bodies under cover. Mike Syddell reports S ome say Australia is no longer the land of opportunity for international mineral explorers or, for that matter, local overheads, they are less able to look outside the square of brownfields sites around existing or previously known mining areas. But according to Chris Bonwick, Managing Director of Independence Gold NL and a geologist by background, it is not the amount of money available that is the issue. “Over the years the industry has proved that it can waste dollars like no other,” he said. With 70 per cent of Australia under cover, there is general agreement that what is needed are new exploration and drilling tools that will enable smaller companies to explore areas previously off limits technically. These should include old land surfaces under the Murray Basin sands and the area of southern Victoria under recent basalt flows, according to Peter McCarthy, Managing Director of AMC Consultants. He says that better tools would overcome the poor correlation between past spending and discovery. The new tools that the industry says it requires are in geophysical data such as magnetic and gravity imaging, and ways of reducing drilling costs (see box, over).
earthmatters
DECEMBER 2003 junior companies who are increasingly taking on the mantle of exploring this continent. The short-term thinking that has prevailed in financial markets has made it very difficult until the past few months for junior explorers to raise funding for greenfields exploration in Australia, except where there is market ‘excitement’ for metals or minerals such as diamonds or nickel. At the other end of the mining industry, the series of takeovers of Australian mining houses by British, North American and Swiss companies has seen many funding decisions transferred overseas and local exploration scaled back or passed to a junior company. An example is the acquisition by Straits Resources of Mount Isa Mines’ exploration portfolio following MIM’s takeover by Xstrata. Another is WMC Resources’ decision to sell off a series of former nickel mines and surrounding tenements near Kambalda in Western Australia to junior explorers. While smaller companies are undoubtedly more nimble, without massive head office 5 COVER STORY
Lifting the lid continued What explorers want
Hand-in-hand with new exploration tools must come cheaper and more effective drilling methods, say miners. They believe current drilling methods are far too expensive to see sufficient numbers of holes put into the ground to deliver the number of new discoveries that Australia will need to maintain its position as a major world supplier of many metals and minerals. So what would miners like to see developed? Peter McCarthy, of AMC Consultants, believes that much diamond drilling could be replaced by percussion drilling with fully automated rod handling and camera borehole surveys. “Costs would be halved,” he said. Chris Bonwick, of Independence Gold, comments that direct measurement of metal ions in gas to detect buried ore bodies would be an appropriate area for development. “(Also) deeper reversecirculation drilling technology could save lots of dollars,” he said. Joe Cucuzza, of AMIRA International, says that there should be research into smart ways to develop new drilling technology, such as laser drilling while at the same time carrying out real-time chemistry. “There is the potential to save on costs of current technology by moving away from diamond holes and relying more on reverse-circulation drilling accompanied with down-hole technology like the oil industry – and only take core samples where appropriate,” he said. “But this will require better down-hole technology, including interpretation.” Milan Jerkovic, Managing Director of Straits Resources, says that exploration tools that reduce direct drilling costs would benefit the industry. Next issue: What scientists say How scientific breakthroughs have driven gold production through discovery in Australia
On the question of geophysical data, Ian Chalmers, Exploration Director of Alkane Exploration Ltd, believes that most states are doing a good job in this area regionally, but now need to start looking at the next generation of data – to be provided in greater detail. Mr McCarthy points to the competitive advantage that the FALCON airborne system has given to BHP Billiton. This is echoed by Mr Bonwick who says that BHP Billiton now uses it as a partnership-levering mechanism to increase its access to exploration opportunities. “Examples like FALCON should be funded by the major mining houses for their commercial advantage and, in parallel, by the Federal Government for the national advantage,” he says. To develop new exploration tools, a clear view is emerging in the mining industry that there must be cooperation between major mining houses and governments spending some of their resource-based taxes to fund development of new technology. As Mr Bonwick says: “Government funding requires a recognition that it is a strategic issue for Australia to be developing and retaining this expertise in this country. That is, it is a strategic issue for Australia to be discovering ore bodies in Australia.” There are serious reservations among some in the mining industry about international collaboration – using Australian taxpayer money or Australian mining company contributions for collaborative projects to possibly benefit overseas competitors. It has happened often in the past. One junior mining company head, who did not want to be named, points to taxpayer-funded technology being transferred to Iran with no Australian company involved in the project. Another example is given by Mr Bonwick of Independence Gold: “The scenario where the Australian Government paid tens of millions of taxpayer money to fund the development of the world-standard fixed-wing AEM system which now resides in an international company in Holland, is truly pathetic.” As well as provision of new exploration tools, there is the perennial problem of access to funds. Few executives interviewed for this article were convinced that throwing dollars at exploration, especially using present tools, was the answer. “If exploration companies were run and managed better they would provide a better return on the investment dollar and, hence, investors would invest,” Mr Bonwick says.
Peter McCarthy: Better tools would overcome the poor correlation between past spending and discovery 6 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 DARRYL PERONI COVER STORY A new book outlines how research under cover and the persistence of explorers delivered a gold province that now has annual production of $400 million. Ross Storey reports B efore 1987, geologists considered the Yandal greenstone belt in Western Australia a poor cousin of the highly mineralised Norseman-Wiluna belt – just 50 kilometres away. Many prospectors combed the area but found slim pickings because Yandal has less than 10 per cent exposure represented by deeply weathered outcrop. It took R&D into the distribution of gold in the regolith – the deep blanket of weathered rock, soil, rock fragments and blown sand resting on the Earth’s bedrock – to uncover Yandal’s hidden treasures. Explorers such as Mark Creasy and Ed Eshuys took notice of the regolith work done by the CSIRO in the 1970s and 1980s. The Jundee deposit was discovered between 1989 and 1992, Bronzewing was found in 1992, and the Centenary ore body at Darlot in 1996. By 2000, these mines were producing 25 tonnes of gold a year. Yandal’s annual production is now worth $400 million. The exploration industry’s application of new sampling methodologies, derived from research into the processes of formation and geochemistry of weathered materials, contributed to a dramatic increase in the discovery of gold deposits in Australia from the mid-1980s. The remarkable story of the 1980s gold boom and the changing gold exploration approach is told in a new book: Yandal Gold Province: Geoscience and Exploration Success, edited by Kim Ely and Neil Phillips. Authors of the 219-page book include Neil Phillips and Ernst Kohler, Ravi Anand (CSIRO/Cooperative Research Centre for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration), Trevor Beardsmore (Barrick Gold of Australia), Brett Davies and Shaun Chanter Hidden treasure
Valuable summary: From left, authors Ravi Anand (CSIRO), Brett Davies of Newmont Australia, and CSIRO's Ernst Kohler (Newmont Australia), Julian Vearncombe (Vearncombe and Associates), Russell Mason (Fractal Graphics), and Yasmin Gardner (University of Western Australia). Dr Kohler said Bronzewing was found because exploration geologists applied the understanding of some of the critical bedrock features responsible for localising gold mineralisation below the weathering front, coupled with knowledge about how gold is distributed in the regolith profile. CSIRO Exploration & Mining researcher Dr Anand recognised that iron-rich materials identified at surface around Mt McClure became buried in the profile going eastwards towards Bronzewing. The recognition of this material provided a useful sampling medium during exploration and was important in the discovery of Bronzewing. Dr Kohler said that at Jundee, Mark Creasy based his exploration on research which found that if the cover was thin and the top of it, or specific parts of it were sampled, an indication of the mineralisation beneath could be obtained. Research at CSIRO, including through CRC LEME, has shown that if the cover is less than five metres thick, explorers can see the expression of the mineralisation by taking certain soil samples at the surface. If the cover is thicker, the chance of seeing that reflection is generally much lower. That simple snippet of knowledge has profound implications for exploration. Dr Kohler said regolith and hard rock geology research indicates that there remains considerable potential in the Yandal belt for the discovery of significant further ore deposits. The Yandal discoveries LINK
Copies of Yandal Gold Province: Geoscience and Exploration Success are available for $35 via www.em.csiro.au Ernst Kohler +61 8 6436 8714 ernst.kohler@csiro.au
Shining example: The thickness of transported cover in the Yandal belt based on the interpretation of drilling earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 7 INTERVIEW The catalyst for growth
to do more detailed work to pinpoint the best part of the ore body. That’s where you need the instrumentation sensitivities, and that’s where you have to progress from macro approaches to micro-sensitivities. With some of the current instrumentation, you can see down 50 metres, maybe 100 metres. We need to come up with an instrument that is able to read certain things further down, but we also need what you might call the computer software mathematical processing intellect. We need CSIRO and its research partners to come up with routines, programs and analyses that take the signals from these instruments and remove the background ‘noise’. It isn’t just people in mineral resources looking at this, it is the total package where you bring in the talent – and that’s what CSIRO has to offer. For example, you might look at the airborne magnetics and gravity, and the sensitivities around those. Who should fund these developments?
It is very difficult for an individual company to go and develop these advances, and it becomes something that is of national interest (or at least of state interest in the use of that instrument). Individual companies have limited areas where they can use something that comes out like BHP Billiton’s FALCON (airborne system), and it can be very expensive to access. But if a State Government bought the time and invested in flying over their areas, they could provide information at a cost. That would be an investment into attracting majors and juniors into their state to go and do more detailed work, help with the focusing, and bring in their competitive edge. South Australia has done it over the Gawler Craton most recently – and look at the activity that has generated. That is where again technology comes through as the key, but it must be recognised that it is not low cost and you need organisations with the breadth and talent of CSIRO. How can Australia restore its position as the industry’s favourite exploration destination? We spoke to Andrew Michelmore, the Chief Executive of WMC Resources. How important is technology in turning around Australia's exploration fortunes?
In Australia, the easy stuff has been found. As most geologists are well aware, a lot of Australia is covered by weathered or transported material. The ability to see through that cover is the limiting step. And that is where technology is the key – how you actually see through that area. We are seeing limitations in nickel sulphides, even copper to a certain extent, diamonds and gold around the world. There are significant opportunities here if we can see through the cover for where these ore bodies and structures exist. CHRISTIAN PEARSON Do we have the next generation of tools?
Some of them are under development. At the moment the key is knowing what data to discard. We have seen in most significant ore body finds that the first tests provide indicators that you are getting warm, and then you have
8
earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 Are our ideas, data and technology sufficiently tailored for Australian conditions?
The answer to that is never going to be yes because we continue to learn and keep pushing the boundary. You do the best you can with the boundary you see and then you realise that there is more past that boundary. We have done that in here – getting away from the pull of having to get out and drill something, to having the time to go back and think about how ore bodies formed. You need to do that analytical work from known bits of information and then work up. Does the industry believe in the quality of Australian science?
Oh, yes. There is admiration for the quality of the science. We are probably among the world leaders in the application of information and communication technology. This technology enables us to maintain our operations and generate considerable exports from our work in remote locations, by providing the instrumentation and software we use. Australia and Australian companies can export expertise, services and technology into other countries for running their industries, and we are seeing that already with the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises in this area. Large companies have been reducing their internal development and research groups to share the technology development and funding through the Australian Minerals Industry Research Association, CSIRO and the CRCs. ANDREW MICHELMORE
Born 28 September 1952 Melbourne 1971-75 Bachelor of Chemical Engineering (first class honours), Melbourne University Rhodes Scholarship for Victoria Master of Arts (politics, philosophy and economics), Oxford University, England To what extent is this sort of work being done now?
Some of the thinking is being done. A lot of the work that CSIRO is doing is stepping back and asking: Where should we be looking? What could be there? What instruments do we need? The current ones might not be able to do it. So the focus is on what level of sensitivity we need to get to. 1976 1976-78 1976-81 ICI Australia 1976 1976-78 1978 1979-81 Process engineer Leave of absence (Oxford University) Process engineer, ICI Mond, UK (six-month secondment) Environmental engineer, senior process engineer What are the national benefits of an exploration recovery?
One is obviously the development of these instruments and the thinking that flows into Australia from finding ore bodies here. We know any investment by the mineral industry into a region has a multiplier effect of four to five. So if we spend $1 billion on the mine, it generates more than $4 billion through engineering companies, employment, catering groups and other suppliers. The activities drive development of other areas of technology and improvement, and small ore bodies are worth finding because the infrastructure is in place. And obviously there are lots of taxes and royalties that are paid in various forms to government. Olympic Dam was one of the last major discoveries made under cover. What role did R&D play in that discovery?
Instrumentation certainly helped identify where the anomaly was, and the overlay of various geochemistry and geophysics pinpointed the areas to drill. This was absolutely key technology. There was no way of chipping away at some rocks on the surface and seeing any sign of it. When you go out there and see Olympic Dam, there is nothing visual to show any reason for drilling there. CSIRO talks about the concept of the Glass Earth. It conjures up exactly what we need to be able to do – and we may need to see through two, three, four or five hundred metres. At Olympic Dam, you’re looking through more than 300 metres. 1981-89 CRA Services Ltd 1981-85 1985-86 1988-89 Project Manager, New Projects Division General Manager, Nilcra Ceramics General Manager Technology, Industrial Components 1989-92 Nabalco Pty Ltd 1989-92 1991-92 General Manager, Nabalco (Gove Joint Venture) Chief Executive, Swiss Aluminium of Australia What would be the impact on the community if gold and nickel finds were not made in the next 20 years?
That would be of huge significance. You would see the cash flow driven out of Western Australia and its resources sector. Western Australia would be a very sad state. There is a reasonable wheat crop and agriculture in the south-west corner, but it would be very difficult to sustain the infrastructure around Perth. 1993- WMC Resources Ltd 1993-94 1994-96 1996-97 General Manager, West Australian operations Executive General Manager, Nickel and Gold Executive General Manager, Business Development, Planning and Technology Executive General Manager, Industrial Minerals and Fertilizers Executive General Manager, Business Strategy and Development Chief Executive Officer How is automation at Olympic Dam changing the way you’re doing business?
We can operate longer and utilise our equipment better. One person can look after several pieces of equipment, we can get more consistent use of the engines and components and of course we are taking people out of potentially hazardous areas and reducing wear and tear on the human body. So we see lots of benefits. The challenging thing is it changes our mindset about how we should design mines. That is the next challenge as part of the continual drive for improved productivity. 1997-00 Is there a responsibility to increase exploration expenditure and exploration effectiveness? If so, whose responsibility is it?
On the micro scale, the fine-tuning of the competitive edge and the thinking is up to individual companies. They will get in and challenge each other and drive improvements simply because of that competition. But on the macro scale, for Australia’s benefit, public funds should go into financing entities such as CSIRO and the Cooperative Research Centres. We have been successful in pulling together the talents from CSIRO, the universities and other research entities to maximise the outcome. 2001-02 2003Other positions 1997- Chairman, Jean Hailes Foundation for Women’s Health Chairman, CSIRO Mineral Resources Sector Advisory Council Director, Ian Clunies Ross Foundation 1999- 2000-03 LINK
www.wmc.com
earthmatters
DECEMBER 2003 9 RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY Shedding new light Making an impression: The Australian synchrotron building at Clayton, which is due to open in 2007, will enhance Australia’s research capabilities Synchrotrons are giant molecular microscopes which produce high intensity x-rays and light that probe matter. As Tim Thwaites reports, CSIRO researchers are using synchrotrons overseas to study mineral formation, extraction and processing – and now Australia is to get its own synchrotron. H ow are ore bodies formed? What is their chemical and physical structure? Where are the metal atoms located and in what form? How do the chemical reactions of extraction and processing proceed? These are the sort of crucial questions a synchrotron can help answer. Rod Hill says the Australian synchrotron will increase understanding of the critical science and technology relevant to the future prospects of the mineral industry. Dr Hill, Chair of the CSIRO Sustainable Minerals and Energy Group, represents CSIRO in the scientific negotiations surrounding the $200 million Australian synchrotron, to be opened in 2007 only 1.5 kilometres from the organisation’s Clayton campus in Melbourne. Because synchrotron radiation is so intense, it provides plenty of energy input for analysis even when focused to very small spot sizes. This means it can provide structural information right down to the atomic level, and that makes it extremely useful for all sorts of materials-based research – on everything from proteins through to plastics and minerals. Minerals processing and mining, along with the biological-pharmaceutical area and materials science are the domains driving CSIRO to become involved, says Dr Hill. He says synchrotrons have provided critical information for the mineral industry in several areas. These include increased understanding of the fate of heavy metals in mine and processing wastes, and understanding the location and abundance of chromium contaminants in ilmenite for titanium production. Already Ian Grey and Ewen Silvester of CSIRO Minerals have been using a synchrotron in France to investigate how chromium is bound into ilmenite, and what might be required to release it. This information is vital in the production of a wide range of titanium dioxide pigments, paints, sunscreens and other valueadded materials. Other CSIRO researchers using synchrotrons overseas include Chris Ryan, who is collaborating with the Experimental Facilities Division of the Advances Photon Source in How synchrotrons work
Synchrotrons take electrons generated by a cathode ray tube (similar to a TV picture tube) and use powerful electric fields to accelerate them close to the speed of light. Such an electron stream can be bent by a series of strategically placed magnets into a circular path – about 200 metres in circumference (60 metres in diameter) in the proposed facility. As electrons move at high speed on their circular storage ring, covering a billion kilometres an hour, they emit a broad spectrum of photons from the infrared, through visible and ultraviolet light, to hard x-rays at tangents to the electron path. The electrons travel in vacuum and are synchronously ‘recharged’ as they circulate 10 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 This approach uses a high-energy proton microbeam to image and analyse trace elements in minerals and their enclosed fluid and solid inclusions, and is the focus of numerous researchers from several universities, the Predictive Mineral Discovery Cooperative Research Centre and Geoscience Australia, who are probing the processes leading to the formation of ore bodies. Barbara Etschmann and Weihua Liu are working with the South Australian Museum to develop ways of using the synchrotron to increase understanding of the chemistry of metals in ore fluids to help model the oreforming process on computers. So far they have undertaken experiments on facilities in Chicago and in the Japanese city of Tsukuba. Ian Madsen is planning a trip to the Daresbury synchrotron in Britain to extend laboratorybased studies on the reactions that take place when nickel is extracted from low-grade ores. And Colin Macrae is looking at how the synchrotron can expand microanalysis using an electron microprobe. CSIRO has agreed to make a financial contribution of several million dollars to become a member of a proposed consortium of foundation users, along with research institutions such as Melbourne University and Monash University. These are the people, Dr Hill says, who will be closely involved in designing and building a core set of 10 to 12 beamlines containing equipment that can use synchrotron light to On track: A stylised illustration of the Australian synchrotron. The machine has a capacity of 30 beamlines, enabling simultaneous experimentation across a wide range of disciplines investigate aspects of matter. And as part of this foundation group, CSIRO would receive preferential access to beamtime. He says CSIRO is also interested in becoming the operator-manager of the facility, just as it is in the Australia Telescope National Facility or the Southern Surveyor ocean research vessel. “It fits nicely with CSIRO’s national science agency role,” he says. “The synchrotron is a means by which data can be collected at levels of precision and accuracy and in timeframes that cannot be achieved with laboratory-based equipment. “The sort of data you are going to be collecting with a synchrotron, and the sort of information you are going to be obtaining from that data, is important for CSIRO’s general understanding of geological phenomena and the behaviour of minerals during downstream processing.” Dr Hill says some of the more progressive companies may collaborate with CSIRO and underwrite some of the costs associated with obtaining a better understanding of the fundamental science and technology relevant to their industry. For example, he expects minerals sands researchers to be early candidates for beamtime. LINK
www.synchrotron.vic.gov.au www.em.csiro.au/ore_deposit_processes/ research/projects Rod Hill +61 3 9545 8300 rod.hill@csiro.au Leading the charge: Rod Hill is representing CSIRO in the scientific negotiations surrounding the Australian synchrotron around the outer ring of the machine. This synchronous replacement of energy lost as synchrotron light gives the synchrotron its name. This synchrotron light, at intensities billions of times greater than can be produced in a standard laboratory, can then be tapped off and channelled down straight ‘beamlines’. At the end of the beamlines, the radiation interacts with matter. The light is absorbed, reflected or diffracted in characteristic patterns determined by the arrangement and type of atoms and it is trained. Once detected and measured, these patterns can be interpreted as a structure or an image.
CHRISTIAN PEARSON molecules making up the material on which earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 11 IMAGE COURTESY OF AUSTRALIAN SYNCHROTRON PROJECT Chicago on his quantitative imaging techniques developed for the CSIRO nuclear microprobe. REGOLITH SCIENCE Grand scale
Mineralogist and geochemist Rob Hough is using microscopic clues to help solve major mysteries surrounding mineral discoveries and the evolution of the Earth’s atmosphere. Mike Edmondson reports Y oung CSIRO scientist Rob Hough thinks big but works small. His microanalytical work is putting a new focus on part of the Glass Earth collaborative research project, which aims to plot regolith-landscape evolution across Australia and enable the mineral industry to see through the overburden that currently hides mineral deposits. It’s a focus that may eventually lead to a single microscopic slice from a grain of dirt being enough to help reveal what minerals lie below. “I’m working on the weathered material that lies above mineral deposits, anything between one and 100 metres,” Dr Hough said. “We’re looking in much more detail and using new techniques to try to characterise where target minerals or trace elements reside within that profile.” The work will complement bulk sampling by building a greater understanding of how metals migrate in the regolith. “We are working on how we get these trace element anomalies not just above mineral deposits, but maybe in transported material in sediments as well,” he said. “If we can understand better how those anomalies form, we can improve exploration strategies. “Instead of looking at the bulk specimen, I’m using electron microscopes and various new microanalytical tools to look at the individual minerals or single features like the pisoliths. “Eventually we hope to improve our understanding of the regolith so we can say how a gold anomaly formed, because you can see where the gold actually resides within that rock and how it got there. “So we are trying to see through the regolith cover and help prevent companies wasting money by drilling for deposits that are not there.” The 33-year-old former Londoner is also working on a project looking at the crystallographic textures of the sulphides and gold of the enormous Witwatersrand gold deposit near Johannesburg, South Africa. The project could help shed new light on when the Earth’s atmosphere became oxygenated enough to support life. “We are looking at other mineral deposits to see if we can see evidence of sulphidation of iron oxide grains, then doing comparative studies at the Witwatersrand to try to work out what’s going on,” he said. In this project, electron back-scattered diffraction is used to look at little pyrite balls associated with the gold. Dr Hough is examining the internal crystallographic structure of those pyrites to try to work out Big steps using tiny specimens: Rob Hough uses electron microscopes and microanalytical tools to improve understanding of how minerals were formed 12 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 their original crystallography – looking for textures of the sulphidation process. “If the pyrites were originally iron oxide grains and subsequently became sulphidised by a fluid that passed through this rock, that would suggest that the gold is of hydrothermal origin,” he said. “But there is also an argument that the pyrites are rounded because they have been rolled around a lot prior to deposition in a sedimentary succession and that therefore the gold is detritral. Lack of weathering of these sulphide grains has been used to infer an oxygen deficient atmosphere during deposition. “If you can prove that the pyrites are sulphidation products of iron oxide grains then the Witwatersrand deposits will no longer support an oxygen-depleted atmosphere at 2.8 billion years.” Dr Hough said knowledge of the evolution of the atmosphere would help explain when and how life began to emerge, and would have implications for other environments where the issue has been whether there has been an oxygen-rich or an oxygen-poor atmosphere. The Witwatersrand goldfield was chosen as a suitable site because of its age, because the sulphide structures were among the best in the world to study and because a wealth of background knowledge about the deposit already existed. Dr Hough, a CSIRO Exploration & Mining post-doctoral research fellow based in Perth, is a geology graduate from the University of London, and went on to do a PhD at the Open University in Britain. He studied the formation of diamonds through meteorite impact cratering using mainly microanalytical techniques such as electron microscopy and also stable isotope geochemistry. By the late 1990s, Dr Hough’s fieldwork had taken him to the United States, Mexico, Canada, Germany and Italy and he had gained considerable expertise in the geological ramifications of meteorite impact craters. Impressed with what he had heard about research facilities and opportunities in Australia, he applied for a UK Royal Society Research Fellowship. In 2000, the fellowship brought him to Perth, where he worked for the Western Australian Museum for 12 months Picture this: The view through a microscope of a regolith sample that has been analysed for gold and other elements by laser ablation. The laser pits left by the analysis are arrowed studying Australian meteorite impact crater geology. He then sought to apply his microanalytical work to mineral exploration and after proposing the idea to the CSIRO, he was offered his current fellowship. Dr Hough is a firm believer in giving young researchers the opportunity to broaden their learning and careers in a supportive environment such as the CSIRO. He is leader of the Mineral Hosts project, funded by the Cooperative Research Centre for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration. LINK
www.em.csiro.au/regolith_and_enviro_ geoscience/ Rob Hough +61 8 6436 8763 robert.hough@csiro.au Tools of the trade
Rob Hough uses a variety of tools and techniques in his microanalytical work. These include laser ablation – vaporising microscopic samples with a laser beam so the vapour can be analysed – and ICPMS, a type of mass spectrometer for doing in situ geochemical analysis. “We take a thin section of a rock or regolith sample so we can see the individual components, using the laser ablation tool to probe individual parts,” he said. “We are talking about a laser beam that’s about 30 microns across, so we are looking at very small-scale changes. We can move from different minerals around the thin section, looking at skins and rims of pisoliths to cores. “Using a laser you produce a plasma of a small volume of material that is analysed by the mass spectrometer and you are able to say whether and where trace elements are residing in the different parts of this rock sample.” Other tools include microRAMAN spectroscopy and electron back-scattered diffraction in the scanning electron microscope. earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 13 COMPUTATIONAL GEOSCIENCE Language no barrier Connecting people, applications and disciplines: Simon Cox is developing a language for the geosciences that will enable data to be shared between multiple software packages A self-confessed ‘geek’ is playing an important role in developing a new way of communicating information about geology, exploration and mining. David Cohen reports C SIRO information scientist Simon Cox is creating a web-based language for the geosciences that could revolutionise information sharing and data management. The eXploration and Mining Markup Language (XMML) project has won the backing of state mines departments, geological surveys in Australia and Britain, as well as industry. Dr Cox, a former geoscientist, has just completed the first three-year phase of the project that has got the language up and running. He likens XMML to the mechanics of a telephone exchange: it sits out of sight of the user, but ensures that communicating is accessible and trouble-free. “You don’t worry about how a telephone exchange works, and you shouldn’t have to,” he said. “All you should care about is something being transferred over a wire and giving you a good experience.” XMML is based on XML, eXtensible Markup Language. XML provides basic components to structure data; XMML uses these in a standard encoding for exchange of geoscience data in exploration and mining, between different applications and online. Dr Cox and his colleagues have had to deal with many variables. Essentially, he is developing a way of associating symbols in XMML with concepts in geoscience data. 14 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 What is XMML?
The eXploration and Mining Markup Language (XMML) is part of the alphabet soup that powers technology and communication. Like HTML, the web language that works behind computer screens to help turn text and graphics into viewerfriendly material, XMML converts complex data into clear text. “It’s like HTML in that very important way, and unlike it in some very important ways,” Dr Cox said. “If you look at HTML source code on a web page, XMML is like that: it’s a text format, and it’s easy to transfer between systems. “It’s different in that there’s basically one piece of software that interprets HTML – a browser. With XMML the intention is that it can be interpreted by many different pieces of software.” The language is structured in predictable ways that lets software developers and vendors in exploration and mining industries incorporate it into their own products. XMML is based on Geography Markup Language (GML), which is used to format geospatial data. GML was developed by the Open GIS Consortium, an international body that is developing publicly available geoprocessing specifications. Dr Cox is also one of the principal editors of the GML specification. “We’re creating a technique so things can be fully specific, yet they need to be general enough to manage all the cases one is likely to encounter,” he said. And in mining and exploration, there are lots of ways of describing the same thing. An example is latitude and longitude: almost every geochemistry survey uses its own local grid to determine direction and position. Every mine has its own “mine north” (typically the long direction along the mine, so it fits on a long piece of paper). Another example is a multi-element chemistry analysis on a piece of rock. “Analysing it for gold, copper, arsenic – how shall we write the list of numbers?” Dr Cox said. “How do we know which number is associated with which commodity? Developing techniques for capturing that information in XMML is not trivial.” In the mining industry there are a lot of special requirements, even compared with standard spatial information systems. For example, geographic information usually deals only with two-dimensional maps, but in geology and mining, three-dimensional representation of information is critical. “You drill a hole, you drop an instrument down, you get information about a point a known distance down the hole … but the hole is never straight,” he said. “It’s not depth you’re measuring, it’s a position along a curved line. It’s a weird coordinate system, which you have to understand when you need to convert the position into x,y,z.” But XMML makes using other people’s data much simpler. An example is simulating geological processes at the Predictive Mineral Discovery Cooperative Research Centre (pmd*CRC). The pmd*CRC builds simulations of rock assemblages at various depths being subjected to various pressures, temperatures and fluids to see what sort of mineralisation would happen. A complete model run typically relies on transferring data between five or six distinct software packages. This used to be extremely laborious. “With XMML for interprocess communication the modelling exercise happens a lot faster – you don’t have to deal with a lot of different proprietary file formats,” Dr Cox said. Other uses for XMML will be with mining assay results. Laboratories use different formats, including hardcopy. This can be inconvenient for a mining company that needs to import data from several labs into one corporate database. For related reasons, state mines departments are funding Dr Cox’s work so he can develop an XMML module for statutory reporting. “One of the conditions of the granting of mining and exploration leases is that the leaseholder has to deposit the results of its investigation with the department,” Dr Cox said. “At the moment, management of much of that data is not conducive to reuse: it basically sits on shelves. They’re trying to encourage people to lodge reports digitally, with XMML being the preferred format – so it can be easily reused or directly loaded into a database.” WMC Resources, Placer Dome, the British Geological Survey, and all eight Geological Surveys from Australian states and territories support the XMML project, as well as data management and visualisation software company Fractal Technologies, mining information services company Snowdens, and the Minerals and Energy Research Institute of Western Australia. But even though the language is developed, the project is not over. “As I emphasise to people who are thinking about technology development particularly relating to the web, there is no such thing as ‘done’,” Dr Cox said. “There’s merely versioning. Version 2 of XMML will be hot on the heels of version 1. “People need to abandon the assumption that a system will run stably for 10 or 15 years. The web, where I’ve been working for nine years, is a dynamic platform. Things change as the need arises.” LINK
XMML project http://xmml.arrc.csiro.au Simon Cox +61 8 6436 8639 simon.cox@csiro.au earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 15 MICROSEISMIC RESEARCH Moving pictures Research partners: Ashley Creighton, of Lihir Gold (left) and CSIRO's Xun Luo, who are using microseismic information as part of Lihir's safety management program Small earthquakes can be observed almost everywhere on Earth, and mining activities can create quakes of their own. Now scientists and industry are harnessing seismic information from these earth movements to predict and manage mine collapses and cave-ins. Tim Thwaites reports H ollywood and the plight of California have joined forces to ensure we all know something about earthquakes. They result from the build-up of stress along a fault line, which eventually leads to movement or slippage of rock on one side against the other. Earthquakes are monitored by seismologists using arrays of seismometers – industrialstrength vibration sensors that can detect movement in three dimensions. Analysis of the types of waves, their time of arrival and duration can provide information about the location, orientation and strength of the upheaval. Underground coalmining creates a cavity below the surface where the seam once was. Unbalanced stress conditions result and the surrounding rocks collapse into the cavity, creating mini-earthquakes. The same sorts of waves are propagated through the rock – the fast, pressure or P-waves and the slower transverse S-waves – and similar seismic techniques can be used to measure and learn about the mining process. CSIRO is using this seismic information to better understand collapses. It is also possible to predict when and where rock falls and cave-ins are likely to occur to help miners avoid being caught and to shore up the mine against unwanted collapses. “When you mine out coal, a lot of stress in the rocks needs to be redistributed and that leads to fractures and falls,” says Dr Xun Luo. “And if you can detect how those stresses are being rearranged, you stand a good chance of being able to predict what will happen in the mine.” Dr Luo leads a team from CSIRO Exploration & Mining at the Queensland Centre for Advanced Technologies that for the past 10 years has been exploring how to use small seismometers known as geophones to detect the microseismic waves emitted by rocks under mining-induced stresses. The researchers have been developing equipment that can monitor, analyse and visualise microseismic 16 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 Monitoring earth movements
data, and they have tested it at 15 mines in Australia, China and Papua New Guinea. One of the great advantages of microseismics is that information can be collected remote from the coalface without disrupting production. Microseismic waves can be detected up to one kilometre away from the source and so arrays of up to 30 geophones can be laid out in triangular patterns up to several hundred metres from the mining activity. The instruments can be installed in holes drilled to different depths, to ensure that information can be gathered in three dimensions. And cables from the geophones feed data into an acquisition unit that pre-processes the signals detected by the geophones and stores them for later analysis and interpretation. “You can tell the difference between natural and mining-induced fracturing,” says Dr Luo. “And there are different patterns for shearing movements and tensile failures (breaking apart).” By studying the amplitude and arrival times of the waves, seismologists can pinpoint the location and orientation of the activity in three dimensions, as well as its size and energy. The location of microseismic activity can be very important for safety and mine planning. For instance, engineers at a coalmine in central Queensland became concerned about the possibility that stress redistribution could reactivate a fault running through a coal seam they were mining, and potentially cause the roof to collapse directly above the mining face. Apart from safety considerations, interruptions of production can cost a company millions of dollars. At this mine, Dr Luo’s team was able to provide daily reports of microseismicity which showed little activity occurring along the fault. This information allowed the company to keep mining with confidence that the fault was not creating a hazardous situation. The group has been involved in similar exercises determining the risk of fractures cutting through aquifers, potentially leading to mine flooding. In another case, at a mine in New South Wales, the team was able to link a particular pattern of seismic wave activity with later emissions of methane gas, enabling
Mine excavatio n
Energy radiated as seismic waves S-waves Mining-induced stresses cause rock failure P-waves Geophone Making waves: Seismic radiation caused by a shear fracturing. Seismic waveforms are observed remotely using geophones prediction of release of the gas and precautionary evacuation of miners if necessary. The management of the goldmine on Lihir Island in north-eastern Papua New Guinea is examining how microseismic information can be used as part of its safety management program. The mine is located in an area where excessive ground temperatures create geothermal activity. Just like an earthquake and just like the collapsing ground in a coalmine, rocks being fractured by high pressure steam and gases generate seismic waves. The CSIRO team is working with Lihir Gold’s Geotechnical Superintendent, Ashley Creighton, to collect microseismic data at this mine to understand the interaction between mining and geothermal activity. They hope the information will provide further understanding of the rocks near the mine, providing another ground monitoring tool. Dr Luo says that interpretation of the data can take days, sometimes weeks. For mines wishing to use microseismic monitoring as a routine safety tool, this is too long. “We need real-time interpretation that can be applied to mine data, so that you can see what is happening straight away,” he says. That is why his group is working to enhance automation options in the interpretation process. But mines are not the only underground activity where microseismic analysis could be useful. Civil engineering works that involve tunnelling are becoming increasingly common – and increasingly ambitious. Perhaps the ultimate of these projects are Chinese plans to shunt water from the Yangtze River basin north in three grand diversions located progressively further inland. The plans for the westernmost way, the furthest from the sea, call for a tunnel 300 kilometres long and more than one kilometre underground in parts. Dr Luo hopes to be there with his microseismic equipment. And recent events have also set him thinking about another application – security. “Using our technology, you can detect and locate footfalls,” he says. “It would be easy to use this to alert and guide video cameras and infrared sensors. Such a system should not be expensive to set up using the latest technology.” LINK
www.em.csiro.au/mining_geoscience Xun Luo +61 7 3327 4551 xun.luo@csiro.au earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 17 Dr Andrew King
Geophysicist Andrew King is developing ways of using microseismic data to predict earth movements caused by mining. His work is helping to improve mine safety and mine design. Ask our scientists
You are part of a research group that records seismic activity accompanying mining. What is your role? We are looking at the information and trying to correlate it with the direct measurements of the geomechanical engineers with their stress and strain gauges, and to numerical models of what the ground is doing. We are hoping to get to the stage where we can look at the seismic information from individual events and determine not just where they occurred, but how big they were, at what orientation, how much movement occurred and what stress changes there have been – in short, all the things that earthquake seismologists do. This should also tie in with whatever other information we have, such as knowledge of rock strengths, bedding planes, stresses and strains. We hope to be able to predict what will happen to the ground during mining. Another aspect of my work is not microseismic at all. The collapse of underground roadways is a problem in coalmining. Such falls kill people, bury equipment, and reduce the productivity of the mines. We want to find a way of predicting and preventing them. How do you go about your research? Earthquake seismologists predict the seismic wave patterns that would be radiated by different kinds of fractures. We are trying to do the inverse. We want to be able to look at the wave arrivals at the geophones and predict the source. Sometimes we can do it exactly, and sometimes we can’t do it at all. Extra complications in the mine-scale environment make it a frustrating but interesting experience.
18
earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 We are measuring a bunch of seismic waves. Only part of this signal is due to the source itself. Other parts are due to reflections off coal or mineral seams, and to reverberation within layers. Somehow you have to disentangle the information relating to the source itself from that determined by the surrounding environment. I read the earthquake modelling literature, and work out what is relevant. Then I write programs to apply to our data. If they work, I try to find out what they are telling us, and if not, to narrow down explanations for the differences. And I’m not only looking for answers, but also at how reliable they are. What about the roadway work? Before a roadway roof collapses there must be fracturing. And as the roof fractures, its seismic character changes. We can listen for the cracks directly, and we can also measure the degree of fracturing using soundwaves passing through the rock. We are about to conduct an experiment down in a coalmine – putting a bunch of receivers in the roof of a roadway we know will come down. We hope it will be close enough to what would happen in an undesirable collapse to get useful information. We have done this on a lab scale with models on the order of a few centimetres across, and have picked up tiny effects – acoustic emissions, popping sounds. They start out at random, but then begin to align and coalesce. Eventually, the rock reaches a state where a sudden, large-scale failure occurs. We are hoping to be able to detect the precursors of that process in the real situation. Ultimately what you want is an instrument accurate enough and cheap enough, one of which you can sit in the roof every 10 metres or so – perhaps with a red and green light. When it goes red, you know to get the hell out of there. Maybe there could also be an orange light that says: “Rush in and install more roof bolts.” How can this research best be used? The current ways of knowing what’s happening in the mine depend on a lot of interpretation based on experience and gut feeling. But mistakes can have an enormous cost. Any way of making things more certain – removing the subjectivity – is a good thing. Even if decisions are still subjective, microseismics can supply extra, crucial information. We need more information as to how rock is going to respond to mining. Microseismics can provide broader coverage than present data. For instance, it can give information on movement anywhere in 3D space. It cannot offer instant solutions, but it may provide a way of predicting where problems are likely to happen. LINK
www.em.csiro.au/mining_geoscience/aboutus/ people/andrewking/ www.em.csiro.au/mining_geoscience/research/ projects/microseismicresearch/index.html Andrew King +61 7 3327 4433 andrew.king@csiro.au RESEARCH PAPERS From the literature
Gold: historical wealth, future potential
Neil Phillips and Martin Hughes (coordinators), Dennis Arne, Frank Bierlein, Stephen Carey, Trevor Jackson and Clive Willman Two per cent of all gold ever mined has come from Victoria. The state remained one of the world’s leading historical all-time gold producers until late in the 20th century, but no major new find has been made since the 19th century. However, new projects at Bendigo, Ballarat and Fosterville are revitalising several of the old mining districts with projects to develop major mines. Victorian gold first formed in primary (‘hardrock’) deposits hundreds of millions of years ago in the Palaeozoic. This gold was subsequently chemically enriched in the weathering zone, then redistributed into placers continuously up to the present time. Alluvial placer deposits were the easiest type of deposit to discover and mine, because they partly occurred in modern streams, and therefore supplied most early gold production. Alluvial deposits supplied 60 per cent of Victorian gold, and primary deposits supplied 40 per cent (mined to depths in excess of 1500 metres). Rich alluvial deposits probably formed by the erosion of large ore-rich primary source areas, rather than from numerous, widely-spaced, low-grade quartz veins. Victoria shows similarities with many of the world’s gold provinces; however, unlike many other provinces of its type, large areas remain masked by a cover of younger rocks. Published in Geology of Victoria, Chapter 13, pp 377-432 by the Geological Society of Australia. Butt-Smith Medal
CSIRO and the CRC for Landscape Environments and Mineral Exploration are calling for nominations for the inaugural Butt-Smith Medal, to be awarded in 2004. The Butt-Smith Medal acknowledges the significant contribution of Charles Butt and Ray Smith to research and development in geoscience and mineral exploration in Australia. The work they developed with colleagues is widely credited as having contributed to several successful exploration programs in the 1980s and 1990s. The medal, to be awarded every two years for outstanding and sustained research, is open to geoscientists who have worked on Australian mineral exploration issues for most of their careers. A $15,000 grant will accompany the medal, along with an opportunity for a commemorative address. Nominations close on 31 December 2003. For further information, visit www.em.csiro.au, contact Steve Harvey on 08 6436 8610 or email Steve.Harvey@csiro.au. however, the new plants have experienced serious construction and operating problems. Published in SEG Newsletter; July 2003, no 54, pp 1, 12-18. Numerical modelling of orogenic processes and gold mineralisation in the south-eastern part of the Yilgarn Craton, Western Australia
Peter Sorjonen-Ward, Yanhua Zhang and Chongbin Zhao The authors built numerical models to simulate some of the current theories surrounding the origin of gold deposits and their related hydrothermal systems in part of the Eastern Goldfields Province and Southern Cross Province of the Yilgarn Craton. In particular, they investigated conceptual models of hydrothermal flow and their links with orogenic granitic magmatism. This paper provides an excellent example of the applicability of numerical modelling to mineralisation and to current understanding of ore formation. It was awarded the AB Edwards Medal for the best economic geology paper in the Australian Journal of Earth Sciences in 2002. Published in Australian Journal of Earth Sciences; 2002, vol 49, pp 935-964. Evaluation of radioisotopic dating of Carlin-type deposits in the Great Basin, western North America, and implications for deposit genesis
Greg Arehart, Tony Chakurian, David Tretbar, John Christensen, Brent McInnes and Raymond Donelick Carlin-type sedimentary rock-hosted disseminated gold deposits in Nevada’s Great Basin accounted for 10 per cent of world gold production in 2001 (80 million ounces), with only the countries of Australia and South Africa producing more gold than the state of Nevada. Despite their economic importance, exploration models for the formation for these deposits have been poorly constrained by geochronology investigations because few minerals amenable to radiometric dating are formed during gold deposition. This paper reviews the use of radiometric dating techniques on sediment-hosted gold deposits, discusses the shortcomings of using K-Ar to date phyllosilicate minerals, and demonstrates the innovative use of apatite (U-Th)/He and galkhaite Rb/Sr dating techniques to constrain the age of formation of Carlin-type deposits. Published in Economic Geology 2003; vol 98, p 235-248. Regolith geology of the Yilgarn Craton, Western Australia: implications for exploration
Ravi Anand and Mark Paine This paper discusses the processes responsible for the distribution and formation of regolith and associated landscapes of the Yilgarn Craton and highlights their implications for mineral exploration. It provides an analysis of geological investigations that were conducted in many districts of contrasting contemporary physical features and climate. Many of the regolith types, which result from a complex array of processes of weathering, erosion and depositing, have a distinctive pattern and could potentially provide exploration samples. However, a combination of a long weathering history and a variable degree of erosion has left a highly variable and complex regolith. Consequently, an assessment of its nature and origin, weathering history, geomorphological processes and the relationships between regolith and landform are essential to determine the optimum sampling medium for a particular terrain. A regolith-landform framework and models of regolith evolution of the Yilgarn Craton provide a basis for exploration models and strategy that may be modified to apply to similar terrain elsewhere. This paper received the Stillwell Award for the best paper published in the Australian Journal of Earth Sciences during 2002. Published in Australian Journal of Earth Sciences; 2002, vol 49, pp 3-162. Nickel laterites: a review
Sarah Gleeson, Charles Butt and Mick Elias Nickel laterites have been the subject of considerable interest over the past few years, with several new developments in Australia, although many of these have so far failed to live up to expectations. This article reviews present knowledge on their occurrence, formation and characteristics, and summarises exploration procedures and processing options. Nickel laterite deposits, generally found in tropical or subtropical climates, can be classified as hydrous silicate, clay silicate or oxide deposits. Factors dictating the physical and chemical nature of deposits include composition of the parent ultramafic rock, tectonic history, climate, topography and drainage. Nickel laterite ore is mined using selective or bulk methods in open cut operations. Traditionally, ore is processed using either leaching to produce nickel oxides, cobalt oxides or nickel-cobalt sulphides, or by smelting to produce ferronickel granules or nickel matte. Recent advances in leaching technology should reduce costs by improving the efficiency of processing, thereby increasing exploitation of these resources. To date, LINK
For publications, see www.em.csiro.au/em/newsandinformation/ publications/index.html earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 19 www.em.csiro.au The expert who plotted a new field of vision Developing a safe assessment method: CSIRO's George Poropat (left) with Paul Maconochie of GeoTek Solutions at the Queensland Centre for Advanced Technologies Highwalls and steep benches are risk factors in open pit mining. When CSIRO decided to develop a system to enable geologists to assess highwalls from a safe distance by building 3D computer models, laser ranging seemed the obvious technology to use. But the optoelectronics expert hired for the job thought differently. George Poropat decided that laser technology would take too long to develop and be too expensive, time consuming and difficult to manage for most mining operations. So he and his team created SiroVision, which brings together the latest digital camera technology and specially developed analysis software. It’s inexpensive, fast and flexible, and the mining industry is only just beginning to explore its potential with trials in underground operations. Look out for the SiroVision story in the next issue of earthmatters for your diary
Short course: Geology of Gold
1-5 March 2004, Melbourne
What it will cover: An overview of gold, its industry framework, deposits, districts, styles of mineralisation, and modes of formation, with examples from many of the world’s major gold provinces, including Victoria, the Witwatersrand and Kalgoorlie Outcomes: Exploration methods and strategies based on regolith geology, structure, geochemistry, geophysics, metamorphic processes and visualisation techniques Cost: $220 for students and $550 for industry participants (plus about $200 for a field trip) Hosts: The Victorian Institute of Earth and Planetary Sciences and CSIRO Further information: Jonathan Law +61 3 9545 8202 or Jonathan.Law@csiro.au www.earthsci.unimelb.edu.au/VIEPS Conference: Australasian Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry Association
18-22 October 2004, Fremantle
What it will cover: All aspects of remote sensing with a strong focus on recent developments of spectral sensing technologies (field, airborne and spaceborne) for measuring and mapping mineralogies and related physicochemistries that are important for enhanced exploration, mining and mine environment applications in Australasia and around the world. Key theme: To measure is to manage Who is it for: Explorers, geologists, geophysicists, environmental managers and researchers Further information: www.rss.dola.wa.gov.au/12arspc
Anne Davey +61 2 6257 3299 or 12arspc@ausconvservices.com.au Tom Cudahy +61 8 6436 8630 or Thomas.Cudahy@csiro.au Please note: Abstracts are due by 1 April 2004 20 earthmatters DECEMBER 2003 
