 Home About Us eSubscribe Links CSIRO SOLVE Issue 9 NOV 06 COVER STORY VIEWPOINT: The Big Challenge Catherine Livingstone on why CSIRO must engage the 'knowledge economy' Full Story ARTICLES AGRIBUSINESS: Insect Sharpshooter The technique that has created a selective bug killer may also be used for other targeted chemicals in agriculture Full Story TEXTILES: Rockin' Science An 'air guitar' shirt developed by CSIRO uses technologies that may form the basis for new textile industries Full Story LIGHT METALS: Cooler Smelting* The Light Metals Flagship is working with Rio Tinto to reduce the temperature &#8211; and cost &#8211; of aluminium smelting Full Story SOLID FUELS: Island Solution King Island Dairy had a waste cardboard problem; the island's kelp kilns faced a fuel shortage. CSIRO found an answer Full Story PRECISION OPTICS/WEB SEARCH: Mapping the Stars Australian-built retro-reflectors will help NASA chart the Milky Way and look for new planets Full Story NANOTECHNOLOGY: Light Fantastic The world's smallest electrical circuits create a material that is capable of tuning and controlling visible light Full Story PREVENTATIVE HEALTH: Alzheimer's Quest* Researchers will study 1000 Australians in a bid to identify early warning signs of the devastating condition Full Story WATER USE: Smart Showers A nozzle that makes water droplets hollow promises to cut water usage without changing the shower experience Full Story MEDICAL RESEARCH: Tumour Hope Genetic markers may help doctors more accurately diagnose different types of brain tumour Full Story WATER: Greener Pipelines CSIRO scientists are examining how mining companies can cut water use without compromising efficiency Full Story FOOD INDUSTRY: Efficiency Drive* Food industry logistics are being examined to see how Australian producers can become more competitive Full Story OR DOWNLOAD COMPLETE ISSUE IN PDF format (1,647kb) *National Research Flagships The National Research Flagships program &#8211; one of the largest scientific initiatives ever mounted in Australia &#8211; is specifically designed to integrate and focus our national scientific resources on challenges of the utmost importance to Australia. The Flagships are large (100 or more) multidisciplinary research teams that focus the best of Australia's scientific resources on the most critical challenges we face as a nation. These teams combine the best talent from CSIRO, universities and other research bodies, business and industry. The Australian Government has made this possible through the investment of an additional $305 million in CSIRO over seven years. Hope for a World Without Dementia The dementia epidemic has arrived. There are an estimated 24 million people with dementia worldwide, and by 2040 it is estimated that this number will rise to 81 million. The impact of dementia on public health systems, which is already acute, will become extreme. In recognition of this, the Australian Government has recognised dementia as a National Health Priority; the first government to do so. Worldwide, the direct and indirect cost of dementia is about US$48 billion (A$333 billion). With an increasing number of cases, these costs will rise dramatically. There is a small window of opportunity to find solutions to the dementia epidemic, building on the progress made by medical researchers in the past 25 years. We now know a great deal about the pathology of dementia and that it can develop decades before symptoms show. Evidence from research suggests that the most promising strategies will be based on identifying those most at risk of dementia and developing treatments that may delay its onset. A study by Access Economics has demonstrated that even a five-year delay in the average age of onset would reduce the number of people with dementia by half by 2040. This would result in significant savings to health systems, as well as improvements in quality of life for sufferers and their carers. It is encouraging that much research worldwide is focused on dementia prevention and risk reduction. The Australian Preventative Health Flagship's imaging biomarker and lifestyle aging study is an exciting reminder of the contribution that Australian researchers can make to the international research effort. Australia spends less than 0.4 per cent of the total direct and indirect cost of dementia on dementia research. An annual investment of 1 per cent of the annual cost of dementia &#8211; $50 million &#8211; would be a small price to pay for the hope of a world without dementia. Glenn Rees National Executive Director Alzheimer's Australia Home About Us eSubscribe Links Last Updated: November 23, 2006 &copy; 2006 CSIRO Australia. For use of CSIRO material contact solve@csiro.au Use of this website and content is subject to our Legal Notice and Privacy Statement. Please contact us for assistance, or to provide feedback or comments. 
