 Triathlon Weekend and “Live” Action Saturday &amp; Sunday 16-17 September 2000 Swim, Cycle, Run A spectacular start to the Games.  Swim in the harbour, Opera House and Bridge in the background.  Cycle and run around the Royal Botanical Gardens and lower CBD, finish back in front of the Opera House.  Two gold medals to Australia and a shot at all six.  You know what they say about the best-laid plans of mice and men.  The Australian Tourist Board got its images; the sporting fans got not one hell of a race but two.  Only the medal count fell short of expectations.  Just one silver, sandwiched between the ladies from land-locked Switzerland.  Fortunately the Thorpedo was on hand to revive any faltering Aussie spirits. The Triathlon brings symmetry to the Olympic program, continuing the public spectacular of the Opening Ceremony with on-street racing sustaining the enthusiasm which has embraced Sydney over the past few days, and that will reach its conclusion with the marathon and street parties in two weeks time.  Our first view of Olympic competition came from the Kirribilli ferry.  As we chugged across the harbour towards Circular Quay we spied in the distance a froth of water created by the triathlon women on their 1500m dip in the sea.  The streets were lined several deep with cheering spectators as the competitors completed six laps on bike and two on foot.  As the Australian and Swiss passed us for the last time an Aussie victory looked on, the girl with the white cross looking in need of service from the Red Cross.  But no, when it came to the final run-in she dug deep to leave the home favourite trailing. The following day the men tackled the same course and the crowds were even bigger.  Australian and Brit. battled it out lap after lap as the lead changed regularly in a closely fought race.  Once again you would not have put money the eventual winner as the leaders passed us one last time.  It was terrific just being in the crowds – the view may have been limited in clarity and confined to a fragment of the course; but to see the effort, the bloodied wounds, the joy and pride of the athletes, to be part of an excited, friendly crowd on a warm sunny day was far better than watching at home.  So Australia scored a silver, but the fans won hands down; two great races and cheers for every athlete, particular the Zimbabwean competitor who was lapped during the cycling. Elsewhere the City is alive with activities of every kind.  “David Jones” is the nearest Sydney comes to a Harrods is staging its annual flower show.  Amongst the ground floor counters and in every window are magnificent displays of native flora in brilliant colours that capture the diversity of Australian climates.  On the seventh floor a stunning presentation of Aboriginal art portraying songlines across the landscape.  Against black walls each picture is an island of colour, beautifully lit by spots masked to exactly frame the canvass.  Curator Conrad Bulenda gave an enthralling multi-media presentation covering his twenty years of Aboriginal contact that led to this exhibition.  His understanding and respect for native culture came across as very moving and always on Aboriginal terms – something a lot of Australians (native and immigrant could learn from).  Songlines are route maps memorised in verse, Conrad told of how, apparently lost in the Outback, his Aboriginal companion sang for twenty minutes eventually reciting the route to the next waterhole. “Live” Six of the Sydney’s prime outdoor locations have become entertainment centres for the Olympics.  Equipped with massive TV screens and offering entertainment for all tastes these have become a focal point for Sydneysiders unable to be at the Games themselves.   Darling Harbour, Sydney’s equivalent to an English pier in its heyday, is a popular family venue.  Martin Place in the heart of the CBD offers sophisticated jazz for office workers at lunch and converts to a club venue come nightfall.   Circular Quay presents an outdoor circus. The Domain, Sydney’s Hyde Park – Sydney’s real Hyde Park is more a Regent’s Park – is another family orientated venue, whilst the parks at Central and Pyrmont stage a more alternative program. Saturday night and we head for Darling Harbour.  With thousands of fellow Australians, our nationality conveniently changes when the Green &amp; Gold is everywhere and the Red, White and Blue out of sight, we cheer swimming superstar Ian Thorpe to individual gold and a fingertip win over the loathsome USA team in the 100m relay.  The atmosphere, just as at the triathlon, is warm and friendly – it doesn’t matter where you are from so long as you enjoy good sport and cheer every time the Aussies beat the Yanks in the pool.  Darling Harbour looks set to become our home-from-home as we discovered a new coffee shop “Gloria Jeans” that does a nice range of scrumptious cakes. Sunday afternoon and we’re sunbathing in The Domain whilst being entertained by Australia’s leading C/W stars.  Lee Kernaghan, the biggest star of all, gave a fine performance.  New Zealand contributed with the yodelling Topp Twins – a hilarious act on guitar and spoons ending with a rousing, dancing version of the Do Run Run, which had as all on our feet. So there you have it, it’s all go here in Sydney.  Three days down and I’m thinking I should have done some training, got some early nights in and feasted on pasta. Click the link to: “The First Week” We go to white-water canoeing, judo and try to concentrate on work. Olympic Home Page 
